History of the world for people who want to change it

## Repeating history

Humanity is up to something. Can you feel it? Can you feel us turning into something new? Hanging out with political activists on both the left and right, I rarely find anyone excited about this. They are too busy worrying about climate change and taxes to notice that the universe is giving birth to something completely new -- through us!

If the oceans rise, that will really suck. Paying taxes sucks too! But everyone who has ever changed history had one thing in common: they were able to look beyond the next


American right wingers want to go back to one idealized lost reality, American left wingers want to go back to another. Each side believes that if they could just get their way, we'd be all set and history could just lay down and go to sleep forever.

Me, on the other hand -- I'm quaking in awe as I wait for what comes next. Look at the changes that have come before: fire, language, agriculture, industry and the Internet. Notice how they're coming more and more frequently. The priests of the new church -- the church of science -- say the Singularity may be near: an apocalyptic event in which technology starts creating itself and takes over the universe. But the Jewish, Christian and Islamic traditions were all founded on the premise that humanity is working through history toward an apocalypse.

Any extrapolation into the future based on current trends points to the end of life as we know it. We're either going to be wiped out or turn into something radically different. Any glimpse into the past shows that the apocalypse has already come -- over and over. For the Romans, Europe, the Arab world, the first Americans, Africa, China. For Europe again. And again. History is simply the apocalypse playing out in slow motion.

From the vantage point of evolutionary biology or astronomy, this is nothing new. The universe is just one catastrophic change after another. Change is the only constant. How many planets have already been swallowed up by dying stars? Trillions. How many species went extinct before the first human ever lives? Millions and millions.

Something is different this time. We are thinking and talking about it as it happens. That is what I'm doing right now. This gives us a peculiar relationship with our fate that the dodo never had. Sure, on a purely logical level this doesn't make any difference: Our words and our thoughts are just a unique texture in a never-ending process of universal change that constantly produces new textures.

In other words, we can do something -- consciously -- about our fate. Not with perfect vision, of course. Like everyone always has, we will want and try for outcomes that will be terrible for us in the end. But thinking about the future and trying to influence it -- no matter how flawed -- is what we do, just like...whatever the dodo used to do.

That's what I'm doing in this book. And here's how I'm doing it. I'm doing it from a place of awestruck wonder. Humanity is changing so fast today -- it is like being around to watch a supernova. But better -- because we have no idea what's happening next. And even better than that, because it is nevertheless up to us to determine what happens next. Unlike the dodos, our fate will be decided by our own actions -- intentionally and unintentionally.

I am terrified that a whole generation of humanity -- possibly ours -- will die a painful and pointless death. I am terrified that something awful -- or maybe worse: completely neutral -- will rise up to replace humanity. But I am exhilarated by the possibility that something beautiful will come from us and carry on. Something truly divine.

I have faith that we're better off trying than not trying to reach that outcome. That is not a popular point of view these days, and I'm aware that there is no purely logical way I can prove it. I understand I'm taking a leap of faith. I want you to take it with me. A story is what led me to take this leap -- the story of humanity. For the thousands of years since political history began, humans have been struggling to realize the dream of a just and beautiful world. Even for millions of years before that, our ancestors did so in their own way -- without necessarily being able to put it into words.

The story of humanity is a story of projects undertaken by groups of people small and large, whole nations and even continents. It is the story of risks taken by individuals. It is the story of stories told, and actions taken based on those stories. And this is just another one of those stories.

## Eyes, ears, limbs, brains

Somehow, the universe that we know came into being. Stars formed of simple hydrogen atoms, which melded under pressure to form chunkier elements. Old stars explode, flinging their contents all over the universe to form new stars and, now with all those new big elements, planets too. On at least one of the planets in the universe -- ours -- some molecules happened to form that would repair themselves when torn in two. Or something like that -- no one really knows how reproduction began. The creation of reproduction set off an explosion of new forms. Before long the planet was covered with millions of different types of creepy crawlies that oozed, jittered and eventually got up and walked around. Finally, bringing us up to the current epoch, our ancestors began to think and talk. Their words and ideas took on a certain life of their own -- almost a new form of life, but not quite, because they are still fully dependent on us for their existence. At least for now.

The first animals whose existence we can almost relate to lived about 500 million years ago. Like us, they used eyes and other senses to evaluate the world, bodies to move around in it, and guts to eat it. Separate from all life that came before us, we animals live by constant curiosity, constant activity and constant destruction of other forms. The minute we stop moving, acting, consuming -- trying -- we die.

Somewhere between probably 50 and 100 million years ago, some of our ancestors developed social behavior. Instead of just making their way individually, they began to live in groups of individuals who cooperated and competed to provide protection, food, reproduction and simple comfort and happiness. Very early on, our social ancestors developed complex methods of communication, status structures, and the capacity for trust, reciprocity and deception. For tens of millions of years, we've each expected to contribute to and rely on a structured group.

For tens of millions of years, right up until just several thousand years ago, the way of life of our ancestors changed very little. Before farming and the domestication of animals, everyone lived in groups of usually less than 100 individuals. They paced a well-defined territory, gathering plants and hunting animals. They were not nomads, and were actually normally terrified to leave their familiar and usually small territory. They had no formal leadership, even after the development of language for possibly one or two hundred thousand years. Everyone was free -- even required -- to participate in both the economic and social life of the group. When a decision had to be made, everyone could have some say, or at least try to have a say. And yes, long before we could speak we did make big decisions as groups.

Life in these small groups was relatively egalitarian, but only because serious, long-term exploitation or subjugation was impossible for practical reasons. When we made a living by simply walking around, eating plants and killing the occasional animal, there was simply no way to make someone else work for you. Even if you could somehow swing it, it would have taken more effort than to just go gather your own food, so why bother? For exploitation to work, storable food surpluses were needed. They only came with agriculture, after hundreds of millions of years of pure freedom for all animals.

It was no utopia, however. There was conflict and violence every day. Some individuals had a better deal than others on any given day. Males competed to deliver meat and other goodies to high-status females. Females were more likely to mate with high-status males. (If you're having an unpleasant flashback to high school, you're not alone.) Status, however, was fluid. In our most recent ancestors -- and I'm talking about the past 10 or 15 million years, or possibly much longer -- status was determined substantially by alliances formed by circles of allies. These were essentially gangs of bullies, or cliques of Mean Girls. But even back then, the nerds sometimes had their revenge, and nice people often finished first. In chimpanzees, for example, peacemakers have been observed as having very high status. Researched have watched fighting males bring their disputes to an old (and hypothetically wise?) female for settlement. Every group had constantly shifting factions whose fortunes rose and fell in complex and dramatic story lines. The histories of tiny primate bands ten million years ago would have read fundamentally the same as that of the aristocracy of early modern Britain.

Over the past several million years, a uniquely human way of life emerged. There's no saying when the first modern humans lived.

One of human evolution's earliest turns was our pattern of almost-monogamy, which was pretty different from the mating patterns of our nearest primate cousin. Chimps basically have sex with most everyone in their group on a regular basis. Human ancestors were probably similar, but then developed lasting, public and semi-exclusive bonds. We retained our ability to step out of those bonds, however, keeping things lively and eventually supplying the fuel that powers so much history and literature.

Later developments included fire, clothing and other adaptations that allowed us to wander far outside of our original habitat.

In other words, we've been bred to be social creatures, with a tendency to form families, who are used to participating directly in the economy, government and culture of our society.

For several million years right up until just several thousand years ago, all of our politics and economics played out in groups of usually under 100 individuals. Eventually, a uniquely human way of life emerged. It's impossible to mark in time precisely where humanity began. We

## Small groups of apes




How we lived and what human nature became over millions of years: Good & bad. Lots of violence and hatred. Lots of love and literature.

### How long have modern humans been around? And what is a modern human?

When was the first computer created? It's a tough question to answer. Did the first calculator count? If so, then what was the first calculator? There were mechanical calculators hundreds of years ago -- maybe even thousands.

So when was the first real human? Here's one way of framing the question more precisely: If you had a time machine, and brought back one infant from every millennium, going back one million years, and raised them as adopted children of modern families, which ones would get along just fine in the modern world?

Could the baby you brought from 500,000 years ago acquire language normally, make friends, learn math, go on dates, become a parent and grow old? Most scientists who study human evolution believe not. That individual would probably have some language capacity, but they would simply not be able to keep up. What about 250,000 years ago? Some scientists say yes. Some, however, believe the first modern humans didn't come along until as late as 50,000 years ago.

In other words, we became human gradually. On the timescale of evolution, modern humans may have emerged in an incredibly fast burst of biological change -- but it was a burst that stretched over tens of thousands of years or longer.

Everyone agrees, though, that for the past half million years or so we've been at least very human-like. We diverged from chimps, our closest ape cousin, about eight million years ago. Anyone who's ever watched footage of a group of chimpanzees going about their day in the wild knows that even they are eerily almost-human. In that sense we've been almost-human for millions of years.

We did not abandon that old "ape" way of life as soon as we developed language and became modern humans. The basic structures of social and economic life changed little with the development of language and our other modern human qualities. It took tens or maybe hundreds of thousands of years for us to start living in a truly different way of life. Therefore, the "ape" way of life was also the original human way of life. So it's worth taking a few pages to see what that way of life was like.

### How did the first modern humans live?

Groups of around 100.

Children spaced 5 years.

The climate was perfect! You just feel great about the weather every day in Western Kenya.

Lots of leisure time.

Everyone had access to means of making a living.

### Were we cute and cuddly and peaceful?

Nope. Lots of danger. In-group violence was more common than in typical modern American middle class life, but not as common as it was in early American history or feudal Europe.

Violence and raiding between groups -- including genocide -- was common depending on circumstances of your region.

Hierarchy based on qualities (personality, skills, success) with a little contribution from status of parents.

## Small groups of humans

Then came tech developments that changed who we were on the inside -- but oddly did not change the structure or look of our society.

### Fire

- Fire made it possible for us to spread across the planet into every single region.
- Changed our diets
- But that's about it
- We spread all over the world and split into many subspecies that we much more different than the differences among humans today. It turns out there there was a lot of mixing between these subspecies. Most Europeans have a little bit a few of those species in them.
- But then one species walked out of Africa about 50,000 years ago and pretty much wiped out all of those other subspecies.

### Language

- One of the biological innovations that may have allowed Africans to displace everyone else was probably language. They had it, others might have only had a little of it.
- Religion and ideas varied wildly around the world, with perhaps some almost-universal commonalities.
- Culture of daily life varied wildly too. e.g. Some groups were gentle with children, some harsh. Some had crazy scary initiation rituals, some had no concept of initiation at all. Some were very into self-mutilation, some never would dream of it.
- One universal: there was lots of love, gentleness, literature and reason in every culture, and also lots of hatred, violence, anger and ignorance.
- But the story of that one tiny band of East Africans (i.e. US!) displacing all the other kinds of humans all over the world almost certainly a story that involved a whole lot of genocide.

## Our intellectual prehistory
- It's worth pausing to think about all the amazing literatures we developed all over the world. In some cases, continuous literatures may have developed over tens of thousands of years. All of those were lost in later times, except for possible traces that made it into the earliest recorded literatures, or that survive in maintained oral literatures in a few tiny societies here and there.

# Chiefdoms

## Agriculture -- which really did change our society

When you see a picture of a farmer from the past or from a poor country, behind an ox that’s pulling a plough, you think “how quaint and old fashioned,” right? You shouldn’t. You’re looking at a radical high-tech departure from the original human way of life. Our human and pre-human ancestors foraged for tens of millions of years. We’ve been farming for only the blink of an eye.

No one knows what people were thinking when they first domesticated plants and animals. They did it in different ways, with many different kinds of plants and animals all over the world. They probably invented agriculture very gradually, but spread through imitation very quickly. We do know that the process began independently in several different places around the world at different times. In the end, our new farming way of life was so unusual that you could say we had launched ourselves right out of the animal kingdom. Farmers are astronauts.

So many things changed: Children came one after another with very little space between them — changing the very nature of childhood and parenthood. Some post-ag diets lacked any meat, others were all meat. For many, there were now periods of backbreaking labor. Humans became truly nomadic, because everywhere they lived, they utterly depleted the land (until much later they discovered techniques of crop rotation). They no longer moved in circuits like foragers, but rather in great paths of destruction that tore up and deforested whole continents.
 
The big differences that really shook what it meant to be human was that agriculture allowed for much larger social structures with complex divisions of labor. The egalitarian tradition had survived for a few thousand years after agriculture. Then came a new kind of social-political revolution in which elites emerged with the ability to terrorize and control everyone else. Once this revolution started, it was like dominoes falling to the ends of the earth.
 
Foragers had been democratic. Democracy wasn’t coded in our DNA. Our biology gave us the ability to talk, reason, compete and cooperate. It was just our way of making a living that gave us democracy. Foraging forced everyone to go out and bring home the bacon — well, berries and beetles — themselves. Even if you had a machine gun and suit of armor to force others to do your bidding, it simply wasn’t practical for others to forage your living. Besides, it wasn’t all that hard to forage for your living. And if you wanted respect and status in your group, you needed to go do a little work. If you had a gun, you’d be better off using it to hunt so that you could bring back some meat to share and be a hero.

Domesticated herds and storable gain changed all that. Suddenly, there was a way for a few to make slaves of many. It took us a few thousand years to figure it out — or maybe we actively and successfully resisted attempts at exploitation all those years. We’ll never know. Eventually, though, somewhere, a gang successfully got away with appointing themselves to a brand new kind of job — exploiters. Again, we don’t know the process through which this emerged. Maybe it was the result of one group taking over another. Or maybe it was something that emerged inside of a group.

However it happened, the end result was a deal that went like this: “If you guys feed us, we won’t kill you.” It worked because of surpluses. Even if farmers generally ate worse than foragers, grains and some other plants could be stored for long periods. Domesticated or semi-domesticated herds also were a form of stored food. The exploiters could force the farmers/shepherds to eat the minimum required for survival, leaving feasts for themselves.

Even after these potentials came into focus, thousands of years passed before they became reality. During that interregnum, herds were shared by the group, land was shared. There was no Communist dogma: People did generally have their own plots, and they kept what they grew. But ultimate ownership was understood to be collective and no one went hungry while others ate -- unless they were parents who were choosing to feed their children first in times of famine.

Land use was refactored every few generations to make sure everyone had enough. Those practices can still be found in action around the world, and were practiced up till colonialism in huge chunks of the world. Memories of that ancient way survive in many cultures who haven’t practiced them in thousands of years: the Hebrew Bible contains the memory of such a system in Leviticus, Deuteronomy and elsewhere in the concept of the Jubilee year, when every 49 or 50 or 7 (depending on which book you’re reading) everyone gets their land back.

But then, somewhere, or probably in a lot of places, little cabals of bullies figured out that they could take power by creating a specialized role of soldier, whose job was to control the people. The people became the cattle. Soon tiny armies started to conquer and enslave the tiny groups around them.

## Inequality, institutionalized torture, new kinds of incentives for war
## Possibly new, "bigger" literatures
## One notable development under chiefdoms:
- Violence common inside of and between most chiefdoms. But there was now a new possibility that popped up randomly here and there for short periods of time: there were places and times where some chiefdoms for internal cultural reasons actually worked to prevent/outlaw violence inside the chiefdom; and some of those chiefdoms, sometimes, were spared from violence with other chiefdoms for a long time -- either because they were remote or very strong compared to neighboring groups. So this was the first case of violence-free way of life for humans. The natural tendency to have violence every now and then inside a group and between groups was suppressed by institutions. At this stage, however, it was probably mostly just a fluke without support from a set of political or moral principles.

# Empires



## Big developments that made empire possible:
- Horse
- Writing
- Ships
- New weapons

## Creation of many things we now take for granted as basic ingredients of the modern world. Modern religions. Ideologies. Bureaucracies. Academia. Standing armies. Law. More developed and brutal division of labor. Absolute disenfranchisement of huge chunks of population. Large scale genocide.

# Breakdown of empire and rise of Christian feudalism in Europe











* Just say what the effect was. Don't go into historical detail.
