# American Nations: A History of the Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America by Colin Woodard

This book blew me away. I know it's not a work of high scholarship. And it has a few big holes in its analysis. But it offers a pradigm shift in how to think about American history and politcs that is incredibly useful. It sort of like...OK this is a weird analogy...you have twin infants. And you know they are different and deal with the world differently, and then when they get older you find out one is half deaf and one is half blind. You say, "AH HA! That explains it." Then when you look back, everything about their behavior makes so much sense whereas earlier it was just chaos to you.

So it turns out that American politics are dominated by a handful of subcultures. You've always known that there have been different sentiments clashing in our politics. But you had no idea that they were tied to particular separate cultures of settlers. No comes the Ah ha! moment. Maybe it is hitting me harder than it will hit you because I've been reading a lot of early American history lately. I was already suspecting that the anti-Globalization Left, for example, were the descendants of the Puritans. I was already feeling in my own thoughts the traditions of both the Pennsylvania Quakers and New England Puritans (my great grandparents are split approximately equally on both sides between those two cultures -- and my Dad talked about these cultures quite a bit).

Anyways -- here we go...

## Introduction

> Americans have been deeply divided since the days of Jamestown and Plymouth. The original North American colonies were settled by people from distinct regions of the British Islands, and from France, the Netherlands, and Spain, each with their own religious, political, and ethnographic characteristics. Throughout the colonial period, they regarded one another as competitors—for land, settlers, and capital—and occasionally as enemies, as was the case during the English Civil War, when Royalist Virginia stood against Puritan Massachusetts, or when New Netherland and New France were invaded and occupied by English-speaking soldiers, statesmen, and merchants. Only when London began treating its colonies as a single unit—and enacted policies threatening to nearly all—did some of these distinct societies briefly come together to win a revolution and create a joint government. Nearly all of them would seriously consider leaving the Union in the eighty-year period after Yorktown; several went to war to do so in the 1860s. All of these centuries-old cultures are still with us today, and have spread their people, ideas, and influence across mutually exclusive bands of the continent. There isn’t and never has been one America, but rather several Americas.
[(kindle location 74)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=74)

> A nation is a group of people who share—or believe they share—a common culture, ethnic origin, language, historical experience, artifacts, and symbols. Some nations are presently stateless—the Kurdish, Palestinian, or Québécois nations, for instance. Some control and dominate their own nation-state, which they typically name for themselves, as in France, Germany, Japan, or Turkey. Conversely, there are plenty of states—some of them federated—that aren’t dominated by a single nation, like Belgium, Switzerland, Malaysia, Canada and, indeed, the United States. North America’s eleven nations are all stateless, though at least two currently aspire to change that, and most of the others have tried to at one time or another. This is the story of the eleven nations, and it explains much about who we North Americans are, where we’ve come from, and where we might be going.
<a href="kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=105">kindle location 105</a>

So what are these nations?
[(kindle location 131)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=131)

> *Yankeedom* was founded on the shores of Massachusetts Bay by radical Calvinists as a new Zion, a religious utopia in the New England wilderness.
[(kindle location 133)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=133)

> While short-lived, the seventeenth-century Dutch colony of *New Netherland* had a lasting impact on the continent’s development by laying down the cultural DNA for what is now Greater New York City. Modeled on its Dutch namesake, New Amsterdam was from the start a global commercial trading society: multi-ethnic, multi-religious, speculative, materialistic, mercantile, and free trading, a raucous, not entirely democratic city-state where no one ethnic or religious group has ever truly been in charge. New Netherland also nurtured two Dutch innovations considered subversive by most other European states at the time: a profound tolerance of diversity and an unflinching commitment to the freedom of inquiry. Forced on the other nations at the Constitutional Convention, these ideals have been passed down to us as the Bill of Rights.
[(kindle location 144)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=144)

> Arguably the most “American” of the nations, the *Midlands* was founded by English Quakers, who welcomed people of many nations and creeds to their utopian colonies on the shores of Delaware Bay. Pluralistic and organized around the middle class, the Midlands spawned the culture of Middle America and the Heartland, where ethnic and ideological purity have never been a priority, government has been seen as an unwelcome intrusion, and political opinion has been moderate, even apathetic.
[(kindle location 157)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=157)

> *Tidewater*, the most powerful nation during the colonial period and the Early Republic, has always been a fundamentally conservative region, with a high value placed on respect for authority and tradition and very little on equality or public participation in politics. Such attitudes are not surprising, given that it was founded by the younger sons of southern English gentry, who aimed to reproduce the semifeudal manorial society of the English countryside, where economic, political, and social affairs were run by and for landed aristocrats.
[(kindle location 171)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=171)

> *Greater Appalachia* was founded in the early eighteenth century by wave upon wave of rough, bellicose settlers from the war-ravaged borderlands of Northern Ireland, northern England, and the Scottish lowlands. Lampooned by writers, journalists, filmmakers, and television producers as “rednecks,” “hillbillies,” “crackers,” and “white trash,” these clannish Scots-Irish, Scots, and north English frontiersmen spread across the highland South and on into the southern tiers of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois; the Arkansas and Missouri Ozarks; the eastern two-thirds of Oklahoma; and the Hill Country of Texas, clashing with Indians, Mexicans, and Yankees as they migrated.
[(kindle location 182)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=182)

> *The Deep South* was founded by Barbados slave lords as a West Indies–style slave society, a system so cruel and despotic that it shocked even its seventeenth-century English contemporaries. For most of American history, the region has been the bastion of white supremacy, aristocratic privilege, and a version of classical Republicanism modeled on the slave states of the ancient world, where democracy was a privilege of the few and enslavement the natural lot of the many.
[(kindle location 197)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=197)

> *New France* is the most overtly nationalistic of the nations, possessing a nation-state-in-waiting in the form of the Province of Québec. Founded in the early 1600s, New French culture blends the folkways of ancien régime northern French peasantry with the traditions and values of the aboriginal people they encountered in northeastern North America. Down-to-earth, egalitarian, and consensus-driven, the New French have recently been demonstrated by pollsters to be far and away the most liberal people on the continent. Long oppressed by their British overlords, the New French have, since the mid-twentieth century, imparted many of their attitudes to the Canadian federation, where multiculturalism and negotiated consensus are treasured. They are indirectly responsible for the reemergence of First Nation, which is either the oldest or newest of the nations, depending on how you look at it.3
[(kindle location 209)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=209)

> *El Norte* is the oldest of the Euro-American nations, dating back to the late sixteenth century, when the Spanish empire founded Monterrey, Saltillo, and other northern outposts. Today, this resurgent nation spreads from the United States–Mexico border for a hundred miles or more in either direction. It encompasses south and west Texas, southern California and the Imperial Valley, southern Arizona, most of New Mexico, and parts of Colorado, as well as the Mexican states of Tamaulipas, Nuevo León, Coahuila, Chihuahua, Sonora, and Baja California. Overwhelmingly Hispanic, it has long been a hybrid between Anglo- and Spanish America, with an economy oriented toward the United States rather than Mexico City.
[(kindle location 219)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=219)

> A Chile-shaped nation pinned between the Pacific and the Cascade and Coast mountain ranges, the *Left Coast* extends in a strip from Monterey, California, to Juneau, Alaska, including four decidedly progressive metropolises: San Francisco, Portland, Seattle, and Vancouver. A wet region of staggering natural beauty, it was originally colonized by two groups: merchants, missionaries, and woodsmen from New England (who arrived by sea and controlled the towns) and farmers, prospectors, and fur traders from Greater Appalachia (who arrived by wagon and dominated the countryside). Originally slated by Yankees to become a “New England on the Pacific”—and the target of a dedicated Yankee missionary effort—the Left Coast retained a strong strain of New England intellectualism and idealism even as it embraced a culture of individual fulfillment. Today it combines the Yankee faith in good government and social reform with a commitment to individual self-exploration and discovery, a combination that has proven to be fecund.
[(kindle location 241)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=241)

> Climate and geography have shaped all of the nations to some extent, but the *Far West* is the only one where environmental factors truly trumped ethnic ones. High, dry, and remote, the interior west presented conditions so severe that they effectively destroyed those who tried to apply the farming and lifestyle techniques used in Greater Appalachia, the Midlands, or other nations. With minor exceptions this vast region couldn’t be effectively colonized without the deployment of vast industrial resources: railroads, heavy mining equipment, ore smelters, dams, and irrigation systems. As a result, the colonization of much of the region was facilitated and directed by large corporations headquartered in distant New York, Boston, Chicago, or San Francisco, or by the federal government itself, which controlled much of the land. Even if they didn’t work for one of the companies, settlers were dependent on the railroads for transportation of goods, people, and products to and from far-off markets and manufacturing centers. Unfortunately for the settlers, their region was treated as an internal colony, exploited and despoiled for the benefit of the seaboard nations. Despite significant industrialization during World War II and the Cold War, the region remains in a state of semidependency. Its political class tends to revile the federal government for interfering in its affairs—a stance that often aligns it with the Deep South—while demanding it continue to receive federal largesse. It rarely challenges its corporate masters, however, who retain near–Gilded Age levels of influence over Far Western affairs.
[(kindle location 254)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=254)

> Like the Far West, *First Nation* encompasses a vast region with a hostile climate: the boreal forests, tundra, and glaciers of the far north. The difference, however, is that its indigenous inhabitants still occupy the area in force—most of them having never given up their land by treaty—and still retain cultural practices and knowledge that allow them to survive in the region on its own terms. Native Americans have recently begun reclaiming their sovereignty and have won both considerable autonomy in Alaska and Nunavut and a self-governing nation-state in Greenland, which stands on the threshold of full independence from Denmark. As inhabitants of a new—and very old—nation, First Nation’s people have a chance to put native North America back on the map culturally, politically, and environmentally.
[(kindle location 269)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=269)

> These eleven nations have been hiding in plain sight throughout our history. You see them outlined on linguists’ dialect maps, cultural anthropologists’ maps of material culture regions, cultural geographers’ maps of religious regions, campaign strategists’ maps of political geography, and historians’ maps of the pattern of settlement across the continent. California is split into three nations, and the divide is visible, plain as day, on a map of which counties voted for or against same-sex marriage in 2008. The Yankee-settled portion of Ohio is evident on the county maps of the 2000 and 2004 elections: a strip of blue across the top of a largely red state. Greater Appalachia is rendered almost perfectly in the Census Bureau’s map of the largest reported ancestry group by county: its citizens inhabit virtually the only counties in the country where a majority answered “American.” In 2008 Gallup asked more than 350,000 Americans if religion was an important part of their daily lives. The top ten states to answer affirmatively were all controlled by Borderlanders and/or Deep Southerners, while eight of the bottom ten were all states dominated by Yankees, with Massachusetts and the three northern New England states ranking the least religious of all. Mississippians were more than twice as likely to answer yes to Gallup’s question as Vermonters. In 2007 the most highly educated state (in terms of the percentage of people with advanced degrees) was Yankee Massachusetts (16.0), the least, Deep Southern Mississippi (6.4). The top of the list included Yankee-controlled Connecticut (no. 3), Vermont (no. 6), and Rhode Island (no. 9), as well as New York (no. 5); the bottom included Appalachian-controlled Arkansas (no. 48) and West Virginia (no. 46). Which states first joined together in a carbontrading compact to reduce greenhouse gas emissions? The ones controlled by Yankees and Left Coasters. Which ones have laws banning labor-union shop contracts? All the ones controlled by Deep Southerners, and most of those in Appalachia. Which counties vote Republican in the Pacific northwest and northern California? Those in the Far West. Which vote Democratic? Those in the Left Coast. Which parts of Texas and New Mexico vote overwhelmingly for Democrats? Those belonging to El Norte. National affinities consistently trump state ones, and they’ve done so for centuries.6
[(kindle location 277)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=277)

> Emerging Republican Majority,
[(kindle location 296)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=296)

> Brandeis University historian David Hackett Fischer detailed the origins and early evolution of four of these nations—the ones I call Yankeedom, the Midlands, Tidewater, and Greater Appalachia—in his 1989 classic Albion’s Seed, and added New France in Champlain’s Dream, published twenty years later.
[(kindle location 301)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=301)

> characteristics of New Netherland in The Island at the Center of the World in 2004.
[(kindle location 303)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=303)

> Virginia senator Jim Webb’s Born Fighting (2005) is, in effect, a plea to his fellow Borderlanders for a national self-awakening, while Michael Lind of the New America Foundation has called on his fellow Texans to unseat autocratic Deep Southern rule in favor of the progressive Appalachian strain of the Hill Country.
[(kindle location 304)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=304)

> Any argument that claims to identify a series of discrete nations on the North American continent must address the obvious objection: can nations founded centuries ago really have maintained their distinct identities to the present day?
[(kindle location 308)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=308)

> Is it not the height of fancy to suggest New York City’s distinctive culture is a heritage of having been founded by the Dutch, given that people of Dutch ancestry now account for just 0.2 percent of its population?
[(kindle location 311)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=311)

> I personally celebrate our continent’s diversity, but I also know that my great-grandfather’s people in western Iowa—Lutheran farmers from the island of Funen in Denmark—assimilated into the dominant culture of the Midland Midwest, even as they contributed to its evolution. My Irish Catholic greatgrandparents worked the iron and copper mines of the interior West, but their children grew up to be Far Westerners. My great-great-great-grandmother’s family fled from the same part of Ireland as their future cousins-in-law, but the mines they found work in happened to be in Québec, so their descendants grew up speaking French and traveling on aboriginal snowshoes. All of them undoubtedly altered the places to which they emigrated—for the better, I hope—but over the generations they assimilated into the culture around them, not the other way around. They may have embraced or rejected the dominant culture, but they didn’t replace it. And it wasn’t an “American” or “Canadian” culture they confronted and negotiated with or against; it was one of the respective “national” cultures identified earlier.7 Cultural geographers came to similar conclusions decades ago. Wilbur Zelinsky of Pennsylvania State University formulated the key theory in 1973, which he called the Doctrine of First Effective Settlement. “Whenever an empty territory undergoes settlement, or an earlier population is dislodged by invaders, the specific characteristics of the first group able to effect a viable, self-perpetuating society are of crucial significance for the later social and cultural geography of the area, no matter how tiny the initial band of settlers may have been,” Zelinsky wrote. “Thus, in terms of lasting impact, the activities of a few hundred, or even a few score, initial colonizers can mean much more for the cultural geography of a place than the contributions of tens of thousands of new immigrants a few generations later.” The colonial Atlantic seaboard, he noted, was a prime example. The Dutch may be all but extinct in the lower Hudson Valley—and landed aristocracy may have lost control of the Chesapeake country—but their influence carries on all the same.8
[(kindle location 315)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=315)

## CHAPTER 1: Founding El Norte

> Americans have been taught to think of the European settlement of the continent as having progressed from east to west, expanding from the English beachheads of Massachusetts and Virginia to the shores of the Pacific. Six generations of hearty frontiersmen pushed their Anglo-Saxon bloodlines into the wilderness, wrestling nature and her savage children into submission to achieve their destiny as God’s chosen people: a unified republic stretching from sea to sea inhabited by a virtuous, freedom-loving people. Or so our nineteenth-century Yankee historians would have us believe. The truth of the matter is that European culture first arrived from the south, borne by the soldiers and missionaries of Spain’s expanding New World empire.
[(kindle location 388)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=388)

> While the region inherited New Spain’s political legacy, in other respects it was very different from the viceroyalty’s tropical, densely populated, and feudalistic core. Within New Spain—and later, Mexico—the people of El Norte were seen as being more adaptable, self-sufficient, hardworking, aggressive, and intolerant of tyranny. Indeed, norteños in Mexico would play a leading role in both the Mexican Revolution and the political rebellion against the corrupt Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) in the 1980s and 1990s. In the nineteenth century, New Mexican norteños would propose seceding from Mexico to join California and what is now Nevada, Arizona, and Colorado to form a democratic República Mexicana del Norte; Texas norteños would back the creation of the independent Republic of Texas in 1836, while their neighbors in Tamaulipas, Nuevo León, and Coahuila declared a separate Republic of the Rio Grande, which was put down by force of arms. No wonder the august Mexican historian Silvio Zavala has dubbed the north “the guardian of liberty” in his country.16
[(kindle location 515)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=515)

> Record keeping was lax enough that a mestizo, mulatto, or assimilated Indian could often become officially white through a verbal declaration, circumventing the empire’s caste system. “Practically all those who wish to be considered Spaniards are of mixed blood,” a mid-eighteenth-century Jesuit missionary reported from Sonora.
[(kindle location 537)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=537)

> When the governor of California complained about this practice, a friar responded, “How else can the vaquero’s work of the missions be done?” The first American cowboys were, in fact, Indians.20
[(kindle location 556)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=556)

## CHAPTER 2: Founding New France

> In the fall of 1604—sixteen years before the Mayflower’s voyage—a group of Frenchmen were about to become the first Europeans to confront a New England winter.
[(kindle location 563)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=563)

> The sieur de Mons envisioned a feudal society like that of rural France, only perfected. It would be based on the same medieval hierarchy with counts, viscounts, and barons ruling over commoners and their servants. Democracy and equality did not enter into the picture. There
[(kindle location 581)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=581)

> At the same time, commoners displayed an unusual degree of independence and contempt for hierarchy.
[(kindle location 696)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=696)

## CHAPTER 3 Founding Tidewater

> In the traditional account of the Jamestown story, the dashing Captain John Smith leads a can-do party of adventurers as they hunt for gold, fight with savages, and seduce Indian princesses. They construct a fort, tough out the winters, and build the foundations of “real” American society: bold, scrappy, and individualistic. They came seeking a better life and created the New World’s first representative assembly, harbinger of the great democracy to follow.
[(kindle location 711)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=711)

> To make matters worse, almost none of the settlers knew anything about farming. Half were haughty gentlemen-adventurers, the rest beggars and vagrants rounded up on the streets of London and sent to the New World by force. “A more damned crew hell never vomited,” the Virginia Company president later said of them.
[(kindle location 719)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=719)

> Two events changed the trajectory of Tidewater society, setting cultural patterns that persist to this day. The first came in 1617, when Pocahontas’s husband, John Rolfe, successfully transplanted West Indian strains of tobacco to Chesapeake soil, transforming Virginia from a corporate military base to a booming export-oriented plantation society almost overnight. The second was the English Civil War in the 1640s, the results of which prompted a mass exodus of the families who would form Tidewater’s aristocracy.
[(kindle location 764)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=764)

> From the outset this was a society of a few haves and a great many have-nots.
[(kindle location 778)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=778)

> Life was harsh at the bottom. Indentured servants—some of whom had been kidnapped in England—were bought, sold, and treated like livestock.
[(kindle location 781)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=781)

> As the frontier pushed farther inland in the eighteenth century, servants were bought in large groups by notorious distributors called “soul drivers” who would shackle them and “drive them through the country like a parcel of sheep,” under armed guard, to remote courthouses, where they were sold at a markup to local planters.
[(kindle location 785)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=785)

> Masters were allowed to beat their workers; William Byrd, gentleman of Virginia, whipped a young houseboy repeatedly and, when the boy began wetting his bed, forced him to drink pints of piss—facts Byrd matter-of-factly recorded in his diary. If
[(kindle location 788)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=788)

> Most servants in the seventeenth-century Tidewater were from the hinterlands of London, Bristol, and Liverpool, but a handful were of African descent, starting with twenty bought from Dutch traders in 1619. Unlike the Deep South, however, Tidewater appears to have treated its African servants much as it did their white counterparts through the 1660s. White and black settlers were not segregated, and at least some blacks enjoyed the few civil rights available to commoners. Some even became masters themselves, like Anthony Johnson, who in the 1650s owned several African servants and 250 acres of land on Virginia’s Eastern Shore. Tidewater was inequitable, but it was not yet a racially based slave society.7
[(kindle location 792)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=792)

> Those who survived their indenture received land, tools, and freedom. Like Anthony Johnson, many of them were able to become landowners, a status they could never have achieved in England.
[(kindle location 798)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=798)

> For the few immigrants who could pay their own way to Tidewater, obtaining land was even easier: as soon as they stepped off the boat in Virginia, they were entitled to 50 acres, plus 50 more for every relative or servant they brought with them.
[(kindle location 799)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=799)

> Indeed, as we will see, Tidewater and Yankee New England stood at the opposite poles of the mid-seventeenth-century English-speaking world, with diametrically opposed values, politics, and social priorities. And when civil war came to England in the 1640s, they backed opposing sides, inaugurating centuries of struggle between them over the future of America.
[(kindle location 811)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=811)

> England had been careening toward civil war for much of the century, torn between those faithful to the medieval traditions of the past and those who had embraced more modern ideas about power, trade, and religious governance. On one side was Parliament—dominated by Puritans and lawyers from London and the east of England—which was resisting the monarchy’s efforts to consolidate power, repress religious dissent, and head off what we would now call “free market reforms.” Opposing Parliament were the conservative allies of King Charles I, or “Cavaliers”: country gentlemen from the partly feudal north and west of England, the majority of England’s nobles, and the rural poor under their influence. When fighting broke out in 1642, Puritan New England backed Parliament while Tidewater remained loyal to the king.
[(kindle location 814)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=814)

> For these new elites in both Chesapeake colonies, the overriding goal wasn’t to build a religious utopia (as in early Yankeedom or the Midlands) or a complex network of Indian alliances (as in New France). Whether highborn or self-made, the great planters had an extremely conservative vision for the future of their new country: they wished to re-create the genteel manor life of rural England in the New World. By a quirk of history, they succeeded beyond their imaginations.
[(kindle location 834)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=834)

> One might ask how such a tyrannical society could have produced some of the greatest champions of republicanism, such as Thomas Jefferson, George Washington, and James Madison. The answer is that Tidewater’s gentry embraced classical republicanism, meaning a republic modeled after those of ancient Greece and Rome. They emulated the learned, slaveholding elite of ancient Athens, basing their enlightened political philosophies around the ancient Latin concept of libertas, or liberty. This was a fundamentally different notion from the Germanic concept of Freiheit, or freedom, which informed the political thought of Yankeedom and the Midlands. Understanding the distinction is essential to comprehending the fundamental disagreements that still plague relations between Tidewater, the Deep South, and New Spain on one hand and Yankeedom and the Midlands on the other. For the Norse, Anglo-Saxons, Dutch, and other Germanic tribes of northern Europe, “freedom” was a birthright of free peoples, which they considered themselves to be. Individuals might have differences in status and wealth, but all were literally “born free.” All were equal before the law, and all had come into the world possessing “rights” that had to be mutually respected on threat of banishment. Tribes had the right to rule themselves through assemblies like Iceland’s Althingi, recognized as the world’s oldest parliament. Until the Norman invasion of 1066, the Anglo-Saxon tribes of England had ruled themselves in this manner. After the invasion, the lords of Normandy imposed manorial feudalism on England, but they never fully did away with the “free” institutions of the Anglo-Saxons and (Gaelo-Norse) Scots, which survived in village councils, English common law, and the House of Commons. It was this tradition that the Puritans carried to Yankeedom. The Greek and Roman political philosophy embraced by Tidewater gentry assumed the opposite: most humans were born into bondage. Liberty was something that was granted and was thus a privilege, not a right. Some people were permitted many liberties, others had very few, and many had none at all. The Roman republic was one in which only a handful of people had the full privileges of speech (senators, magistrates), a minority had the right to vote on what their superiors had decided (citizens), and most people had no say at all (slaves). Liberties were valuable because most people did not have them and were thought meaningless without the presence of a hierarchy. For the Greeks and Romans there was no contradiction between republicanism and slavery, liberty and bondage. This was the political philosophy embraced and jealously guarded by Tidewater’s leaders, whose highborn families saw themselves as descendants not of the “common” Anglo-Saxons, but rather of their aristocratic Norman conquerors. It was a philosophical divide with racial overtones and one that would later drive America’s nations into all-out war with one another.17 Tidewater’s leaders imposed libertas on their society in countless ways.
[(kindle location 893)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=893)

> “I am an aristocrat,” Virginian John Randolph would explain decades after the American Revolution. “I love liberty; I hate equality.”18
[(kindle location 921)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=921)

> Tidewater’s semifeudal model required a vast and permanent underclass to play the role of serfs, on whose toil the entire system depended. But from the 1670s onward, the gentry had an increasingly difficult time finding enough poor Englishmen willing to take on this role.
[(kindle location 924)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=924)

> As we will see, this statement does not hold true for “the South” as a whole but rather for the distinct cultural nation of Tidewater.19 It was a strategy that would set Tidewater on a path to destruction.
[(kindle location 932)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=932)

## CHAPTER 4: Founding Yankeedom

> By a twist of history, the dominant colonies of New England were founded by men who stood in total opposition to nearly every value that Tidewater gentry held dear. Hostile to landed aristocracy, noble privilege, the Anglican Church, and the Royalist cause, the Pilgrims of Cape Cod and the Puritans of Massachusetts Bay had an entirely different vision for their new society. A moralistic nation of churches and schoolhouses, where each community functioned as its own self-governing republic, Yankeedom would leave an indelible mark on a vast swath of the continent.
[(kindle location 934)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=934)

> Quakers were disfigured for easy identification, their nostrils slit, their ears cut off, or their faces branded with the letter H for “heretic.” Puritans doled out death sentences for infractions such as adultery, blasphemy, idolatry, sodomy, and even teenage rebellion. They fined farmers who tended their cows, raked hay, or hunted birds on the Sabbath. Boston magistrates put Captain Thomas Kemble in the stocks in 1656 because, having returned from a three-year absence, he kissed his wife at his doorstep—“lewd and unseemly behavior” in the eyes of the court.
[(kindle location 950)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=950)

> Nearly half of Yankeedom’s early settlers came from East Anglia, the most economically sophisticated part of the British Isles. Its seven easternmost counties were the most densely settled, urbanized, and educated part of England, with a burgeoning middle class and a long history of rebellion against arbitrary rule. It was a region profoundly influenced by the Netherlands, the most commercially and politically advanced nation in Europe, which lay just across the English Channel. Dutch Calvinism, republicanism, agriculture, architecture, art, and commerce had left their mark on the region, which had tulip gardens, gabled houses, and a highly literate population of artisans, craftsmen, and yeoman farmers. Champions of the Germanic notions of freedom, East Anglians participated in town meetings and chose selectmen to run local affairs. Not surprisingly, the region would strongly support Parliament against the king in the English Civil War. Many of these East Anglian characteristics were transplanted to New England.
[(kindle location 958)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=958)

> From the beginning Yankeedom was opposed to the creation of a landed aristocracy and suspicious of inherited privilege and the conspicuous display of wealth. Unique among the colonies, its leaders didn’t hand out massive swaths of land to friends, family, and allies so the latter could become rich by retailing lots out to others. Instead the Puritans gave town charters to approved groups of settlers, who in turn elected a committee of their peers to select the location of the public road, church, schoolhouse, and town green and to divvy up family lots. While larger or wealthier families might have been granted larger lots, the division was surprisingly egalitarian.
[(kindle location 980)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=980)

> The New England settlement model differed from Tidewater not merely in the presence of towns but in the power vested in them. Puritans believed every community of the chosen should govern itself without interference from bishops, archbishops, or kings; every congregation was to be completely self-governing. Worldly matters were to be dealt with in exactly the same way. Every
[(kindle location 988)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=988)

> While counties had almost no powers at all, every town had its own government: a group of selectmen elected by the adult male members of the church. The selectmen acted as a plural executive, while the town’s eligible voters gathered for town meetings and functioned as a miniature parliament.
[(kindle location 992)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=992)

> Indeed, Yankees would come to have faith in government to a degree incomprehensible to people of the other American nations. Government, New Englanders believed from the beginning, could defend the public good from the selfish machinations of moneyed interests. It could enforce morals through the prohibition or regulation of undesirable activities. It could create a better society through public spending on infrastructure and schools. More than any other group in America, Yankees conceive of government as being run by and for themselves. Everyone is supposed to participate, and there is no greater outrage than to manipulate the political process for private gain. Yankee idealism never died.
[(kindle location 999)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=999)

## CHAPTER 5:  Founding New Netherland Most Americans know the Dutch founded what is now Greater New York City. Few realize that their influence is largely the reason New York is New York, the most vibrant and powerful city on the continent, and one with a culture and identity unlike that of anyplace else in the United States. Incredibly, its salient features developed when Manhattan was still largely a wilderness and the greatest city on Earth was but a tiny village clinging to the island’s southern tip. New Netherland was founded in 1624, just four years after the Mayflower voyage and six years ahead of the Puritans’ arrival in Massachusetts Bay. Its
> [(kindle location 1066)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1066)

> Its population was equally diverse, including French-speaking Walloons; Lutherans from Poland, Finland, and Sweden; Catholics from Ireland and Portugal; and Anglicans, Puritans, and Quakers from New England. Jews were banned from setting foot in New France, Yankeedom, and Tidewater, but dozens of Ashkenazim and Spanish-speaking Sephardim settled in New Amsterdam in the 1650s, forming the nucleus of what would eventually become the largest Jewish community in the world. Indians roamed the streets, and Africans—slave, free, and half-free—already formed a fifth of the population. A Muslim from Morocco had been farming outside the walls for three decades. Visitors were shocked by the village’s religious, ethnic, and linguistic diversity. In 1643 Father Isaac Jogues, a Jesuit working in New France, estimated New Amsterdam’s population at 500 and the number of its languages at 18, an “arrogance of Babel” that “has done much harm to all men.”2 The different ethnic and national groups often kept to themselves and squabbled with one another for power, with not even the Dutch forming a majority within the settlement. The local elite was comprised almost entirely of self-made men who’d risen from humble origins in the worlds of commerce and real estate speculation. The government, desirous above all to promote trade, embraced diversity even as it eschewed democracy. The village was, to put it simply, New York, and many of its characteristics have endured to the present day. These characteristics—diversity, tolerance, upward mobility, and an overwhelming emphasis on private enterprise—have come to be identified with the United States, but they were really the legacy of the United Provinces of the Netherlands.
[(kindle location 1083)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1083)

## CHAPTER 6:  The Colonies’ First Revolt While everyone knows that the English-controlled colonies rebelled against the tyrannical rule of their distant king, few realize they first did so not in the 1770s, but in the 1680s. And they did so not as a united force of Americans eager to create a new nation, but in a series of separate rebellions, each seeking to preserve a distinct regional culture, political system, and religious tradition threatened by the distant seat of empire.
> [(kindle location 1209)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1209)

## CHAPTER 7:  Founding the Deep South The founding fathers of the Deep South arrived by sea, their ships dropping anchor off what is now Charleston in 1670 and 1671. Unlike their counterparts in Tidewater, Yankeedom, New Netherland, and New France, they had not come directly from Europe. Rather, they were the sons and grandsons of the founders of an older English colony: Barbados, the richest and most horrifying society in the English-speaking world. The society they founded in Charleston did not seek to replicate rural English manor life or to create a religious utopia in the American wilderness. Instead, it was a near–carbon copy of the West Indian slave state these Barbadians had left behind, a place notorious even then for its inhumanity.
> [(kindle location 1356)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1356)

## CHAPTER 8:  Founding the Midlands The most prototypically American of the nations was one of the last to be founded. From its inception in the 1680s, the Midlands was a tolerant, multicultural, multilingual civilization populated by families of modest means—many of them religious—who desired mostly that their government and leaders leave them in peace. Over the past three centuries, Midland culture has pushed westward from its hearth in and around Philadelphia, jumped over the Appalachians, and spread across a vast swath of the American heartland, but it has retained these essential qualities. It is Middle America, the most mainstream of the continent’s national cultures and, for much of our history, the kingmaker in national political contests.
> [(kindle location 1522)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1522)

> He became close to the sect’s founder, George Fox, and helped shape the Friends’ practices. On his father’s death in 1670, William Penn was one of the most famous Quakers in England and very, very rich.3 Penn enjoyed the finer things in life—confiscated manor houses, expensive clothing, fine wines, a staff of servants—but nurturing Quakerism was his first priority. Quakers, he decided, needed their own country, a place where they could conduct a “holy experiment” that would serve as an “example to all nations” that would prompt “all Mankind to go hither.” In 1680 he settled King Charles’s debt to his late father in exchange for a grant of 45,000 square miles of real estate located between Lord Baltimore’s Maryland and the Duke of York’s New York. The province (which was as large as England itself) would be named Pennsylvania, after the late admiral. William Penn would have the authority to do pretty much whatever he wished there.4
[(kindle location 1560)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1560)

> In 1682 Penn sent twenty-three ships to Pennsylvania carrying 2,000 colonists with tools, provisions, and livestock. Four years later 8,000 people were living in and around Philadelphia, a population level that took Tidewater twenty-five years to achieve and New France seventy years. Most were skilled artisans and farmers of modest means who had come as families, instantly giving the Midlands a settled and civilized tone. With ample food, good relations with the Indians, and a Quaker majority, the “holy experiment” had gotten off to a highly promising start.6
[(kindle location 1582)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1582)

> Between 1727 and 1755 another 57,000 flooded in, making Pennsylvania the only English-founded colony without an English majority.7 The Germans easily adapted themselves to Quaker plans for this new society. They were generally content to let the Quakers run things, supporting Quaker candidates in elections and endorsing Quaker policies.
[(kindle location 1597)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1597)

> 1753. “How much we are indebted to the Germans for the economy they have introduced [to this] . . . infant colony.”
[(kindle location 1604)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1604)

> The Germans and Quakers also shared a strong aversion to slavery, a stance that would set the Midlands apart from New Netherland, Tidewater, and the Deep South. As family farmers, the Germans had little need for slaves, but their antipathy seems to have been a function of cultural values, as well.
[(kindle location 1608)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1608)

> None of them succeeded in getting Quaker leaders to assume responsibility for the community they’d created. Philadelphia’s Quakers preferred to focus on their respective Inner Lights than to tend to the worldly responsibilities of running a colony.10
[(kindle location 1630)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1630)

> They would prove the undoing of Quaker control of that colony. “It looks as if Ireland is to send all her inhabitants hither,” a worried colonial official reported. “The common fear is that if they continue to come, they will make themselves proprietors of the province.”11
[(kindle location 1639)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1639)

> Even when French mercenaries sailed into Delaware Bay and began sacking plantations a few miles from Philadelphia, the government refused to consider any defense preparations. Benjamin Franklin, a Boston Yankee who’d relocated to Philadelphia, railed at the Friends for their complacency. “To refuse defending one’s self or one’s country is so unusual a thing among mankind that . . . [our enemies] may not believe it,” he wrote in 1747, “till by experience, they can come higher and higher up our river, seize our vessels and plunder our plantations and villages and retire with their booty unmolested.” The Quakers, steadfast in their pacifism, ignored Franklin, leaving him to raise private donations to organize the colony’s defense.12
[(kindle location 1645)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1645)

> As refugees choked the capital, Quaker politicians refused to endorse military appropriations. One leading Quaker, Daniel Stanton, wrote in his diary that the fact that few Friends had been killed in the fighting indicated that God approved of their inaction. Few non-Quakers endorsed Stanton’s analysis, noting that the Friends’ lack of casualties had more to do with the fact that they were clustered in the safest corner of the province. Even London Quakers were appalled. “You owe the people protection and yet withhold them from protecting themselves,” an influential Friend there wrote his coreligionists in Philadelphia. “Will not all the blood that is spilt lie at your doors?” Forced to choose between defending their society and upholding their religious principles, key Quaker officials resigned from office. The Friends would never again monopolize political affairs in the Midlands.13 The Quakers were replaced by a partisan system of competing interest groups, with Franklin and his allies often dominating the scene.
[(kindle location 1655)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1655)

## CHAPTER 9:  Founding Greater Appalachia The last of the nations to be founded in the colonial period, Greater Appalachia was the most immediately disruptive. A clan-based warrior culture from the borderlands of the British Empire, it arrived on the backcountry frontier of the Midlands, Tidewater, and Deep South and shattered those nations’ monopoly control over colonial governments, the use of force, and relations with the Native Americans. Proud, independent, and disturbingly violent, the Borderlanders of Greater Appalachia have remained a volatile insurgent force within North American society to the present day.
> [(kindle location 1668)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1668)

> The Borderlanders weren’t really colonists, brought to the New World to provide some lord or shareholding company with the manpower for a specific colonial project. They were immigrants seeking sanctuary from a devastated homeland, refugees who generally arrived without the encouragement or direction of officials, and often against their wishes. Having no desire to bow to “foreign” rule or to give up their ways, the Borderlanders rushed straight to the isolation of the eighteenth-century frontier to found a society that was, for a time, literally beyond the reach of the law, and modeled on the anarchical world they had left behind.
[(kindle location 1675)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1675)

> Their ancestors had weathered 800 years of nearly constant warfare, some of them fighting in (or against) the armies of William “Braveheart” Wallace or Robert the Bruce. By the time America was being colonized, the borderlands were in ruins. “The country is so stored with infinite numbers of begging and vagrant poor, who by reason of their extreme want and misery are very bold in their behavior and impudent,” an English spy said of Scotland in 1580. The north of England, a foreign diplomat wrote in 1617, “was very poor and uncultivated and exceedingly wretched . . . from the perpetual wars with which these nations have savagely destroyed each other.”1
[(kindle location 1681)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1681)

> Living amid constant upheaval, many Borderlanders embraced a Calvinist religious tradition—Presbyterianism—that held that they were God’s chosen people, members of a biblical nation sanctified in blood and watched over by a wrathful Old Testament deity.
[(kindle location 1688)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1688)

> “I do not see how Ireland can on the present foot pay greater taxes than it does without starving the inhabitants and leaving them entirely without meat or clothes,” one visitor warned the Anglican archbishop of Ireland in 1716. “They have already given their bread, their flesh, their butter, their shoes, their stockings, their beds, their house furniture and houses to pay their landlords and taxes. I cannot see how any more can be got from them, except we take away their potatoes and butter milk, or flay them and sell their skins.” Taxes were increased all the same, leaving thousands of tenants with no other option than to sell their tenancy rights and book passage to the New World. As rents on newly expired leases doubled, cattle prices fell by half, and more crop failures occurred, the initial group of emigrants would be followed by tens of thousands and, later, hundreds of thousands of countrymen. 3
[(kindle location 1697)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1697)

> “They emigrate in swarms to America,” one official in Ireland warned. “Something must be done to give the Irish poor a means of getting bread. If the cow is to be milked, she must be fed.”
[(kindle location 1705)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1705)

> The bishop of Derry in Northern Ireland told imperial officials that “the rebellious spirit” then brewing in the American backcountry was due to the emigration from Ireland of 33,000 “fanatical and hungry republicans in the course of a very few years.”
[(kindle location 1707)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1707)

> Officials did their best to get them out of town and onto the frontier, where they could serve as a buffer against French or Native American attack.5 Destitute and land hungry, the vast majority were indeed happy to move straight to the backcountry, where they seized, in the words of a senior colonial official, “any sort of vacant land they can find without asking questions.” Some had a little money left from their passage and could have rented land in settled areas closer to Philadelphia but chose not to. As one explained: “We having been, before we came here, so much oppressed and harassed by under landlords in our own country, from which we with great losses, dangers, and difficulties came [to] . . . this foreign world [to be] freed from such oppression.”
[(kindle location 1716)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1716)

> They hunted, fished, and practiced slash-and-burn agriculture, moving every few years as the soil became depleted. Life in Britain had taught them not to invest too much time and wealth in fixed property, which was easily destroyed in time of war. Instead, they stored their wealth in a very mobile form: herds of pigs, cattle, and sheep. When they did need cash, they distilled corn into a more portable, storable, and valuable product: whiskey, which would remain the de facto currency of Appalachia for the next two centuries.6
[(kindle location 1724)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1724)

> “They are very poor owing to their extreme indolence, for they possess the finest country in America and could raise but everything,” a Deep Southern minister wrote of the southern Appalachians in 1768. “They delight in their present low, lazy, sluttish, heathenish, hellish life and seem not desirous of changing it.” Indeed, the Borderlanders’ top priority rarely seemed to be increasing their wealth; rather, it was maximizing their freedom, especially from outside forces.7
[(kindle location 1729)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1729)

> They earned social standing from their individual deeds and accomplishments, rather than any sort of inherited station. Borderlanders recognized as “family” individuals out four generations in either direction, effectively creating enormous clans. Intermarriage between first cousins was commonplace, reinforcing the bonds of kinship. At the lower end of the social scale were the families who survived on hunting, foraging, and preying on their neighbors’ crops, livestock, valuables, and daughters. Containing the predations of the latter group would become a major political issue as Appalachian civilization took root.9
[(kindle location 1749)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1749)

> “little more than white Indians,” one disgruntled South Carolinian observed, while backcountry Virginians complained of those “who live like savages.”
[(kindle location 1769)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1769)

> This crime wave discouraged settlers from accumulating wealth, reinforcing the old Borderlander pattern. “The person who by his honest labour has earned £50 and lays it up for his future occasions, by this very step endangers his own life and his own family,” one South Carolinian observed. “If we buy liquor for to retail or for hospitality they break into our dwellings and consume it,” backcountry settlers in that colony reported in 1769. “Should we raise fat cattle or prime horses for market, they are constantly carried off [even when] well guarded.” Runaway slaves from Deep South plantations joined the “banditti” in considerable numbers, some of them rising to lead their own gangs. This threatened the expansion of the Deep South as that nation could not survive in a region where bandits offered refuge to runaways. “The lands, though the finest in the province, [are] unoccupied and rich men [are] afraid to set slaves to work to clear them,” Anglican minister Charles Woodmason warned, “lest they should become a Prey to the Banditti.”
[(kindle location 1805)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1805)

> The cultural divide was even more disruptive in North Carolina, where Tidewater gentry, who effectively controlled the colony’s government, tried to assert jurisdiction over the Borderlanders in the 1760s. The legislature—which gave ten times more representation per capita to the coastal lowlands—imposed a property tax system based on acreage, not property values, effectively shifting the burden from wealthy plantation owners to impoverished Borderlanders. The new royal governor, Sir William Tryon, increased the burden in 1765 in order to build himself a lavish £15,000 palace. Again the backcountry responded with a vigilante movement of “Regulators” who violently seized control of the Appalachian portion of the colony for three years starting in 1768. Beating lawyers, sacking courthouses, and expelling tax collectors, the Regulators remained in power until their army of 2,000 was defeated in a pitched battle with Tidewater militia at Alamance Creek in 1771. Many Regulator leaders took refuge in the deep backcountry of what would one day be called Tennessee. Here, too, the inter-national tensions between Appalachia and the coast would profoundly shape allegiances when the American Revolution erupted a few years later.17
[(kindle location 1823)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1823)

> Frustrated by outside rule, some Borderlanders tried to create nation-states of their own, flouting the authority of both the British crown and their Native American neighbors. In north-central Pennsylvania, a group of squatters with a Scots-Irish majority set up its own “fair play system” of government modeled on the democratic principles of the Presbyterian Church and the radical individualism of the Scottish Marches. The forty families of this independent Fair Play territory continued their experiment in frontier self-sovereignty for five years until 1784, when the line of settlement overran the area and they were absorbed, perhaps unwillingly, into the general population.18 A larger-scale experiment took place farther south in what is now the eastern part of Tennessee and central Kentucky, where several thousand Borderlanders insituted an improvised government deep inside Indian territory. Their new nation, Transylvania, was created in direct violation of the Royal Proclamation of 1763 (which prohibited settlement west of the Appalachians), the legal jurisdictions of North Carolina and Virginia (which then claimed the territory), and His Majesty’s property rights (as the Crown legally controlled all undeeded land on the continent). Without any permission they created their own constitution, government, courts, and land offices. Their leaders, including the lowland Scot immigrant James Hogg, dispatched frontiersman Daniel Boone to hack a 200-mile access trail into what is now central Kentucky, enabling settlers to stream in to found Boonesborough. There, in early 1775, they convened a “House of Delegates” under a massive elm tree in a clearing declared to be “our church, state house, [and] council chamber.” When word came that the other colonies were convening a Continental Congress to discuss tensions with Great Britain, Transylvania sent Hogg to Philadelphia with a request to be admitted as the fourteenth member.19
[(kindle location 1832)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1832)

> As the British-controlled nations careened toward a series of conflicts with the mother country, the Borderlanders of Appalachia would play a decisive role. In some regions they would fight in support of Britain, in others, against, but they all did so for the same reason: to resist the threats to their clansmen’s freedom, be it from Midland merchants, Tidewater gentlemen, Deep Southern planters, or the British crown itself. It was a pattern that would define Appalachia to the present day.
[(kindle location 1847)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1847)

## CHAPTER 10:  A Common Struggle The event we call the American Revolution wasn’t really revolutionary, at least while it was underway. The military struggle of 1775–1782 wasn’t fought by an “American people” seeking to create a united, continent-spanning republic where all men were created equal and guaranteed freedom of speech, religion, and the press. On the contrary, it was a profoundly conservative action fought by a loose military alliance of nations, each of which was most concerned with preserving or reasserting control of its respective culture, character, and power structure.
> [(kindle location 1852)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1852)

> The rebelling nations certainly didn’t wish to be bonded together into a single republic. They were joined in a temporary partnership against a common threat: the British establishment’s ham-fisted attempt to assimilate them into a homogeneous empire centrally controlled from London.
[(kindle location 1857)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1857)

> By the 1680s, when the Crown tried to impose uniformity and centralization of power, it was already too late to easily do so. Some of the nations were by then several generations old and had traditions, values, and interests of their own.
[(kindle location 1879)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1879)

> In the decades since the Puritans, Quakers, Cavaliers, and Barbadians first left England, a new social force had taken shape to run this expanding empire: an arrogant ruling class. It even had its own “upper-class” accent, created in the early eighteenth century and regarded (by colonials and the English lower classes alike) as artificial and pretentious. Its members married one another almost exclusively. It founded new elite boarding schools like Eton, Westminster, and Harrow to educate and assimilate its children into its ways. It created powerful new institutions like the Bank of England, the modern Royal Navy, and the East India Company, through which it could control lesser mortals at home and abroad. In the early 1600s England was ruled by aristocrats who had been raised and tutored on their family manors or in their regional shire towns and had provincial identities, accents, and agendas. By 1763 the British ruling class was made up of men who had been educated among their elite peers in centralized patrician boarding schools and who thought of themselves as members of an imperial elite. In the aftermath of the Seven Years’ War, they sought to do what King James II had failed to do eighty years earlier: subjugate the American colonies to their will, institutions, bureaucracy, and religion.1
[(kindle location 1885)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1885)

> Since the average American colonist’s tax burden was just onetwenty-sixth that of his British counterpart,
[(kindle location 1895)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1895)

> Baron Amherst, seeking to “Extirpate this Execrable Race,” instructed his troops to distribute smallpox-infested blankets to the Indians. Ultimately even biological warfare was unable to bring them to heel, and Amherst was recalled in disgrace. 3 “We tell you now: the French never conquered us, neither did they purchase a foot of our country,” Pontiac told Amherst’s successor. “If you expect to keep these [Great Lakes region trading] posts, we will expect to have proper returns from you.” After making peace, it was all the more important to British imperial officials that the colonists be kept in line and out of the Indians’ land beyond the Appalachians.4
[(kindle location 1917)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1917)

> The nation with the greatest religious and ethnic cohesion, national self-awareness, and commitment to self-governance, Yankees were willing to fight and die to preserve “the New England Way.” Some of them saw the struggle as a sequel to the English Civil War and the Glorious Revolution, with good Calvinists fighting the forces of despotism and Popery, this time in the form of a grasping monarch and the “Catholic Lite” Anglican Church with its bishops and idols. From eastern Maine to southern Connecticut, the Puritan churches—now termed Congregationalist—lined up on the patriot side, urging their members to resist. The Puritan notion that self-denial is virtuous was applied in the form of consumer boycotts of British luxury and manufactured goods. As a Rhode Island newspaper put it, citizens must “forsake the use of one of their delights to preserve their liberty.” As one Revolutionary War veteran would later explain: “What we meant in going for those Redcoats was this: we always had governed ourselves and we always meant to. They didn’t mean that we should.”5
[(kindle location 1923)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1923)

> This was not, unsurprisingly, the case in Greater Appalachia. These sprawling borderlands contained the most fervent and committed champions of both the patriot and loyalist causes. Each local area chose sides based on whom they saw as the biggest threat to their natural freedoms: the colonial elite on the coast or the British elite across the Atlantic. In Pennsylvania the Borderlanders wanted any excuse to march down to Philadelphia and topple the soft, Madeira-sipping elite there, perhaps putting an end to the Midlands as a separate culture; this made them enthusiastic patriots. In Maryland and Virginia, backcountry folk saw the British as their greatest enemy and threw their lot in with the Piedmont faction of Tidewater aristocrats.
[(kindle location 1959)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1959)

> The Midlands wanted nothing to do with a revolution and, in fact, were quite happy with London’s centralization effort. Their leaders did their best to stay out of the conflict altogether. Religious pacifism played a key role, particularly among the Amish, Mennonites, and Moravians who’d fled the horrors of war in Germany. Most Germans, wanting to be left alone and content with the status quo, saw no advantage in leaving the empire, which would likely give greater power to their unpleasant Scots-Irish and Tidewater neighbors. Quakers, who still had considerable influence over Midlands affairs, had little complaint with the monarchy, which had granted William Penn the charter that made their colony possible.
[(kindle location 1968)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1968)

> Both the Dutch and the British imperial elite who governed the province feared a revolution would cause themselves to be toppled from power and that much of New York would fall under Yankee control.
[(kindle location 1983)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=1983)

> In the backcountry, Borderlanders were eager to break the planters’ monopoly on power and would be happy to take whatever side allowed them to do so. And in the lowlands, planters shuddered as rumors began circulating among their slaves “that the present contest [with Britain] was [about] obliging us to give them liberty.” The planters prayed the other nations wouldn’t pull the continent into open warfare, for they knew their tyrannical system might not withstand a major shock. The “great part of our weakness,” a militia officer reported, “consists in having such a number of slaves among us.”12
[(kindle location 2001)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2001)

> John Livingston, a delegate from New York City, left John Adams of Massachusetts with the impression that he “dread[ed] New England, the leveling spirit, etc.” Quakers had not forgotten how their ancestors had been tortured and executed by the Puritans.
[(kindle location 2009)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2009)

> The colonial assemblies refused to allow Appalachia to participate, depriving the enormous region of any voice at the proceedings. The closest thing they had to a delegate was Thomas McKean, a fiery Ulster-Scots patriot from Philadelphia who represented northern Delaware at the meeting and foiled his Midland colleagues at every turn. In North Carolina, where Borderlanders formed a majority, two of three congressional delegates had played key roles in crushing the backcountry Regulators in 1771. Excluded from the proceedings in Philadelphia, Appalachian people reflexively opposed whatever position their respective provincial delegations took. Thus Pennsylvania Borderlanders became ardent patriots (in opposition to the passivity of the Midland elite), while the Carolina and Virginia backcountry became a stronghold of loyalism (in response to the cautious patriotism of the lowland oligarchs).
[(kindle location 2049)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2049)

## CHAPTER 11:  Six Wars of Liberation
> In Albion’s Seed (1989), historian David Hackett Fischer makes the case for there having been not one American War of Independence but four: a popular insurrection in New England, a professional “gentleman’s war” in the South, a savage civil war in the backcountry, and a “non-violent economic and diplomatic struggle” spearheaded by the elites of what I call the Midlands. The four wars, he argues, were fought sequentially and waged in different ways and for different goals.
[(kindle location 2063)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2063)

> What we call the American Revolution did indeed play out very differently in the various nations of the Atlantic seaboard. But there weren’t four neat struggles, one unfolding as the previous one concluded; rather, there were six very different liberation wars, one for each affected nation. Some occurred simultaneously and two involved invasions by one American nation into another. Despite the presence of a nominally continental army, most of the fighting was done by militia forces and guerrilla bands with local loyalties, and many bloody battles occurred in the complete absence of British forces. Wars of colonial liberation are often ugly, combining resistance to imperial forces with a civil war between rival factions hoping to seize control. Ethnic minorities and indigenous elites often side with the colonial power for fear of what might happen to them in the new order. The American wars of liberation were no exception.
[(kindle location 2068)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2068)

> Only when outside commanders learned to explain their reasons for giving a particular order did they begin to earn the trust of their Yankee subordinates. Washington denounced them as “nasty people” in his private letters, even as he publicly pleaded “that all distinctions of colonies will be laid aside” among “troops of the United Provinces of North America.”
[(kindle location 2090)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2090)

> Unfortunately for the Howes, the first part of their strategy collapsed with the defeat and surrender of their northern army at Saratoga, New York, in October 1777 to an essentially Yankee army from New Hampshire, Massachusetts, and upstate New York. The victory was a decisive turning point in the war, not only because it preserved Yankeedom’s independence but because it convinced France to join the conflict, radically altering the balance of power.
[(kindle location 2142)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2142)

> When news came in 1783 that no part of the thirteen colonies would be retained, some 30,000 civilians—perhaps half the area’s wartime population—fled Greater New York City for Britain, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick. New Netherland had fought a war against liberation and had lost badly.5
[(kindle location 2148)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2148)

> The result, in mid-1776, was the assumption of power in Pennsylvania by a vocal patriot minority backed by the Appalachian half of the colony and entirely dependent on the Congress for validity. With little local support, this patriot government and its Delaware counterpart arrested anyone who opposed the war and searched the homes of any who hadn’t “manifested their attachment to the American cause.” Pennsylvania Quaker leaders were rounded up in 1777, denied habeas corpus, and deported to the Appalachian section of Virginia for imprisonment, further alienating the sect’s followers.
[(kindle location 2156)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2156)

> Ordinary citizens were given the power to jail without trial anyone they considered to be an “enemy to the American cause.” The executive organ of the revolutionary government, the revolutionary Supreme Executive Council, was controlled by Borderlanders from the backcountry who were by design grossly overrepresented in the body; they had the power to have anyone accused of disloyalty stripped of his possessions or simply executed. The law was used against opponents and pacifists alike, with a number of Mennonite farmers being left destitute after all their property was taken from them for refusing, on religious grounds, to take an oath of loyalty. For the duration of the war, the tolerance and pluralism of the Midlands was suppressed by occupation forces from neighboring nations.8
[(kindle location 2178)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2178)

> The region’s newspaper published reports that ships had been sent from England carrying 78,000 bayonet-equipped guns to distribute to blacks, “Roman Catholics, the Indians, and Canadians” to “subdue” the colonies. “His Majesty’s ministers and other servants,” the surgeon to the royal garrison in Charleston reported, were imagined to be organizing “slaves to rebel against their masters and to cut their throats.” Residents
[(kindle location 2193)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2193)

> In Pennsylvania the Borderlanders were the shock troops of the revolution, which provided them an opportunity to usurp power in the province from the Midlander elite in Philadelphia. Here the Scots-Irish so dominated the rebel armies that one British officer called them the “line of Ireland.” In London King George III referred to the entire conflict as “a Presbyterian War,” while Horace Walpole told Parliament: “Cousin America has run off with a Presbyterian parson!” The army that famously shivered at Valley Forge was made up almost entirely of Yankees and Borderlanders, and it was the Scots-Irish backcountry leadership that drafted Pennsylvania’s 1776 Constitution, granting the Appalachian districts effective control over the colony. By war’s end they had liberated themselves from the Midlanders and British alike.14
[(kindle location 2234)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2234)

> By contrast, most Borderlanders in North Carolina identified the Tidewater elite as their primary oppressors and took up arms against them to avenge the suppression of the Regulator movement a few years before. The colony’s backcountry settlers, John Adams would later observe, had “such a hatred toward the rest of other fellow citizens that in 1775, when the war broke out, they would not join them.” Backed by a sympathetic royal governor, they fought an unsuccessful campaign against the gentry-led rebel army in 1776.
[(kindle location 2244)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2244)

> Scottish motto: Nemo me impune lacessit, loosely translated as “Don’t Tread on Me.” When
[(kindle location 2248)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2248)

## CHAPTER 12:  Independence or Revolution?
> By the end of the American wars of liberation, the six nations of the eastern seaboard had forged closer connections to one another than they had ever had before. Forced into a military alliance, the dominant nations had successfully fought off threats to their identities and practices and vanquished pacifist Midlanders and loyalist-minded New Netherlanders. But the effort to preserve their separate cultures had produced two unexpected side effects: a loose political alliance with some characteristics of statehood, and a popular movement demanding “democracy,” a prospect the national leaders found quite alarming. In the immediate postwar period, the nations confronted both developments and each had its own take on how to deal with them. The compromises they negotiated or imposed profoundly shaped the American experience.
[(kindle location 2301)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2301)

Note: this whole section is a ton of details about how each nation played a part in the whole pre and post rev period

## CHAPTER 13:  Nations in the North
> If you’re an American, have you ever really asked yourself why Canada exists? When the American Revolution came about, why did only thirteen rather than eighteen North American colonies wind up revolting? Why would the young colony of Nova Scotia be any more committed to the British Empire than the young colony of Georgia? And why would the people of New France, recently conquered by the British, not be eager to throw off their occupiers and become a sovereign state or states? As with their neighbors to the south, the answer has everything to do with the respective parties’ cultures and what they thought was the best way to ensure their survival.
[(kindle location 2451)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2451)

## CHAPTER 14:  First Secessionists
> We’ve been taught to think of the ratification of the 1789 Constitu tion as the crowning achievement of the American Revolution. Most people living in the United States at the time, however, didn’t see it in quite those terms. Outside Tidewater and the Deep South, many were alarmed by a document they regarded as counterrevolutionary, intentionally designed to suppress democracy and to keep power in the hands of regional elites and an emerging class of bankers, financial speculators, and land barons who had little or no allegiance to the continent’s ethnocultural nations. Indeed, the much-celebrated Founding Fathers had made no secret of this having been one of their goals. They praised the unelected Senate because it would “check the impudence of democracy” (Alexander Hamilton), and stop the “turbulence and follies of democracy” (Edmund Randolph), and applauded the enormous federal electoral districts because they would “divide the community,” providing “defense against the inconveniences of democracy” (James Madison).1
[(kindle location 2565)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2565)

> In 1789 Appalachian people were dead set against the creation of a strong, elite-controlled federal government. Many of them feel the same way today.2 The Borderlanders’ uprisings were long dismissed as the thuggish behavior of backcountry louts too ignorant to understand the merits of taxation or the need to settle their debts. In reality, the Borderlanders weren’t against taxation or creditworthy behavior but were resisting a scheme so corrupt, avaricious, and shameless it ranks with those of Wall Street in the first decade of the twenty-first century. In the dark hours of the wars of liberation, the Continental Congress had no money to pay salaries to their soldiers or to compensate farmers for requisitioned food and livestock. Instead Congress gave all these people government IOUs. This practice continued for years until, under the financial administration of the notoriously unethical banker Robert Morris, the state of Pennsylvania announced it would no longer accept the congressional IOUs as payment for taxes. With no other form of money in circulation in much of the countryside, many poor families had no choice but to sell the notes for whatever they could get, and wealthy speculators purchased them for one-sixth to one-fortieth of their face value. Soon just over 400 individuals held over 96 percent of Pennsylvania’s war debt, and nearly half was controlled by just twenty-eight men, most of whom were Robert Morris’s friends and business partners. Shortly thereafter, Morris and his protégé Alexander Hamilton took control of federal financial policy, rigging it so as to literally turn their friends’ worthless paper into silver and gold. Under Morris and Hamilton, the federal government would buy back the bonds for face value, plus 6 percent interest, paid in precious metals raised by assessing new federal excise taxes designed to fall most heavily on the poor people who’d been forced to take the worthless congressional scrip in the first place. But, wait—there’s more. Most people in Appalachia hadn’t seen hard cash in years. The closest thing to cash that Borderlander farmers could create was whiskey, which was nonperishable, marketable, and easy to transport. Knowing this, Morris and Hamilton cynically imposed a sharp tax on this all-important Appalachian product, even as they discouraged their underlings from collecting taxes owed by merchants on the coast. Meanwhile, they used their influence to give themselves and their private banker friends effective control over the new nation’s currency supply—much of it printed by Morris’s private Bank of North America—but with federal taxpayers on the hook to clean up their mess if things went wrong. It’s also worth noting that Morris and Hamilton were both immigrants without ethnoregional allegiances; English-born Morris and Barbadosborn Hamilton both saw North America as the British had: as a cow to be milked for all it was worth.3 But unlike in 1929 or 2008, the victims of this scheme were well aware of what was going on, and it was the people of Appalachia who resisted the federal elite’s machinations most strongly. The greatest uprising that followed would come to be known, derisively, as the Whiskey Rebellion. But what it was really about was the fact that enlisted war veterans had gone unpaid and had been forced to sell the government’s IOUs to pay government taxes, only to then be taxed again to allow vultures to make a 5,000 percent profit on their misery. Those taxes had to be paid in gold and silver, which nobody in the countryside had seen in years. When they couldn’t pay, their farms and possessions would be seized and liquidated to further enrich Morris, Hamilton, and their speculator friends from the coastal nations.4 The Borderlanders didn’t give up their farms or their individual Godgiven sovereignty without a fight. When confederal and federal authorities started trying to collect taxes and seize property, the Borderlanders took up arms and tried to leave the union they now thoroughly disapproved of. of. This Appalachian resistance movement raged for more than a decade and encompassed the highlands from the cultural heartland of Pennsylvania through the Appalachian sections of Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, and the future states of West Virginia, Kentucky, and Tennessee. It began in 1784, when people in the western territories of North Carolina (now eastern Tennessee) became disgusted with Tidewater control. Their solution was pure Borderlander: they created their own sovereign State of Franklin on nobody’s permission but their own. They drafted a constitution that prohibited lawyers, clergy, and doctors from running for office, set up a government in the village of Greeneville, and passed laws making apple brandy, animal skins, and tobacco legal tender. They even applied for membership in the Continental Congress and were supported by seven states; opposition from Tidewater and the Deep South delegates denied them the necessary two-thirds majority. Tidewater-controlled North Carolina forces invaded Franklin shortly thereafter, setting up a rival government and defeating local militia in a skirmish in what is now Johnson City, Tennessee, in 1788. The State of Franklin’s leadership established communications with foreign officials in the Spanish-controlled lower Mississippi Valley, hoping to negotiate an alliance. But war soon broke out again with the Cherokee, driving the Borderlanders back under North Carolina’s protection and ending their experiment in self-government. 5

> While the State of Franklin was being dismantled, Borderlanders throughout western Pennsylvania had cut their region off from the outside world. For nearly a decade, settlers had kept tax collectors, sheriffs, and federal officials out of their communities, cutting off the roads by various means: digging ditches, chopping down trees, diverting streams, provoking winter avalanches, and, in one case, creating a four-foot wall of manure. Government offices were burned in an effort to destroy records of debts. Citizen gangs attacked sheriffs, tax collectors, and judges; repossessed livestock, furniture, and tools taken by creditors; and freed neighbors from debtors’ prisons. Many rebel communities created their own militia units and, in at least one case, signed a pledge to “oppose the establishment of the new constitution at the risk of our lives and our fortunes.” 6

> As Hamilton’s 1790 whiskey tax began to force backcountry settlers into foreclosure, the Midlander-controlled state government passed a law prohibiting county officials from foreclosing on large land speculators’ holdings. Borderlanders reacted to this latest outrage much as their Scots and Scots-Irish ancestors would have: they surrounded tax collectors and demanded they turn over their ledgers and any funds or valuables they had collected. If the collector refused, he would be beaten, tortured, or stripped naked, covered in searing hot tar, and rolled in feathers. The same fate befell law enforcement officers who tried to investigate.

> By 1792 such tactics had been widely adopted by Borderlanders in Kentucky, Virginia, Georgia, and the Carolinas. As excise tax collection and property foreclosures in the region ground to a halt, emboldened Appalachian leaders started talking of bringing down the entire federal financial system. Finally Pennsylvanian Borderlanders proposed creating “a cordial union of the people west of the Allegheny Mountains” that would link them with their countrymen in western Maryland and what is now West Virginia and Kentucky. 7
[(kindle location 2590)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2590)

Note: this swindle is insane!! someone needs to write a whole book about it / love preventing drs and lawyers from running for office / lots like French rev

> “The grand cause of all our present difficulties,” Adams’s nephew and personal secretary explained in 1798, was due to “so many hordes of foreigners immigrating to America.”9
[(kindle location 2670)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2670)

Adams’s presidency proved to be extremely controversial because, as historian David Hackett Fischer has observed, he attempted to force Yankee cultural and political values on the other nations. New Englanders believed that freedom belonged primarily not to the individual but to the community. Unfettered individual pursuit of absolute freedom and property accumulation, they feared, would destroy community ties, create an aristocracy, and enslave the masses, resulting in a tyranny along the lines of the British or the Deep South. To a civilization founded by people who believed they were God’s chosen, protecting the common good meant maintaining internal conformity and cultural unity. Foreigners— whether Virginians, Irish, or African slaves— were considered a threat because they didn’t share Yankee values, so immigration, religious diversity, and the importation of slaves were all actively discouraged in New England. “The grand cause of all our present difficulties,” Adams’s nephew and personal secretary explained in 1798, was due to “so many hordes of foreigners immigrating to America.” 9

> While this belief system worked fairly well domestically, its policy implications were enormously threatening to the value systems of the other nations, leaving Adams to face a difficult presidency, which began in the midst of a geostrategic crisis. In 1789 the people of France had risen up in revolution, captured and beheaded their king, and declared themselves a republic. But their revolution had descended into chaos and terror, with state-enforced atheism, arbitrary arrests and executions, and, finally, a military coup by Napoleon Bonaparte. As Napoleon’s armies spread across Europe, North Americans were caught up in fear and hysteria. Yankee newspapers reported that France was preparing a reconquest of its North American territories and that a 10,000-man invasion force was already assembling. Some 25,000 French refugees poured into the United States— most fleeing a successful slave rebellion in Haiti— triggering fears that they might be plotting with Napoleon. 10

> Amid the fear and xenophobia, Adams pushed through a package of legislation to crush dissent, enforce conformity, strengthen the courts, and drive out foreigners. Congress passed the infamous Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798 by the slimmest of margins, with Yankees and Deep Southerners in favor, and Appalachian representatives deeply opposed. The acts granted the president the right to expel any foreigner or unnaturalized immigrant or to arrest anyone born in a hostile country at will. The acts also increased the number of years of residency required for citizenship from four to fifteen. Meanwhile, anyone who spoke, wrote, or published anything against the government, Congress, or the president that might bring them “into contempt or disrepute” or that might be considered “scandalous and malicious” would be subject to up to five years in prison and a $ 5,000 fine. Two dozen people were arrested for sedition, including Philadelphia Quaker James Logan (for undertaking a peace mission to Paris), a number of critical newspaper writers and editors (for accusing Adams of overstretching his authority), and Kentucky congressman Matthew Lyon (whom Borderlanders reelected while he was in his jail cell). 11
[(kindle location 2681)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2681)

## CHAPTER 15:  Yankeedom Spreads West
> After the revolution, four of the American nations hurdled the Appa lachians and began spreading west across the Ohio and Mississippi valleys. There was very little mixing in their settlement streams, as politics, religion, ethnic prejudice, geography, and agricultural practices kept colonists almost entirely apart in four distinct tiers. Their respective cultural imprints can be seen to this day on maps created by linguists to trace American dialects, by anthropologists codifying material culture, and by political scientists tracking voting behaviors from the early nineteenth century straight through to the early twenty-first. With the exception of the New French enclave in southern Louisiana, the middle third of the continent was divided up among these four rival cultures.
[(kindle location 2807)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2807)

> Their early efforts were supported by their political leaders, whose states laid claim to great swaths of New York, Pennsylvania, and what would become Ohio. Connecticut asserted its jurisdiction over the northern third of Pennsylvania, and its people even fought a now-forgotten war with Scots-Irish guerrillas for control of the area in the 1760s and 1770s. Connecticut settlers won the opening matches with the help of Scots-Irish mercenaries and a favorable ruling from King George I, and founded Wilkes-Barre and Westmoreland; after the revolution, the Continental Congress gave the region back to Pennsylvania, which tried to evict the Yankees by force. Connecticut and Vermont sent soldiers to help the settlers repel the attack, resulting in a final “Yankee-Pennamite War” in 1782. In the end Pennsylvania kept jurisdiction, but the settlers retained their land titles. Similarly, Massachusetts
[(kindle location 2826)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2826)

> True to form, the New Englanders tended to move west as communities. Entire families would pack their possessions, rendezvous with their neighbors, and journey en masse to their new destination, often led by their minister. On arrival they planted a new town—not just a collection of individual farms—complete with a master plot plan with specific sites set aside for streets, the town green and commons, a Congregational or Presbyterian meeting house, and the all-important public school. They also brought the town meeting government model with them. In a culture that believed in communal freedom and local self-governance, a well-regulated town was the essential civic organism and the very definition of civilization. Yankee settler groups often viewed their journey as an extension of New England’s religious mission, a parallel to those undertaken by their forefathers in the early 1600s. The first group to depart Ipswich, Massachusetts, for the Muskingum Valley in 1787 paraded before the town meeting house to receive a farewell message from their minister modeled on the one the Pilgrims heard before leaving Holland. On the last leg of their journey, they constructed a flotilla of boats to float down the Ohio and named the flagship the Mayflower of the West. Similarly, before setting out to found Vermontville, Michigan, ten families in Addison County, Vermont, joined their Congregational minister in drawing up and signing a written constitution loosely modeled on the Mayflower Compact. “We believe that a pious and devoted emigration is to be one of the most efficient means in the hands of God, in removing the moral darkness which hangs over a great portion of the valley of the Mississippi,” the settlers declared before pledging to “rigidly observe the holy Sabbath” and to settle “in the same neighborhood with one another” to re-create “the same social and religious privileges we left behind.” In Granville, Massachusetts, settlers drew up a similar compact before undertaking the journey to create Granville, Ohio.2
[(kindle location 2845)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2845)

> The Yankees consciously sought to extend New England culture across the upper Midwest. The emigrants aboard the Mayflower of the West were typical. On arrival in eastern Ohio, they founded the town of Marietta, and happily imposed taxes on themselves to fund the construction and operation of a school, church, and library. Nine years after their arrival, they founded the first of the Yankee Midwest’s many New England–style colleges. Marietta College was headed by New England–born Calvinist ministers and dedicated to “assiduously inculcating” the “essential doctrines and duties of the Christian religion.” Also, “No sectarian peculiarities of belief will be taught,” the founding trustees decreed. Similar colleges popped up wherever the Yankees spread, each a powerful outpost of cultural production: Oberlin and Case Western Reserve (in Ohio), Beloit and Olivet (in Michigan), Ripon and Madison (in Wisconsin), Carleton (Minnesota), Grinnell (Iowa), and Illinois College.3
[(kindle location 2862)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2862)

> England.4 Nineteenth-century visitors often remarked on the difference between the areas north and south of the old National Road, an early highway that bisected Ohio and which is now called U.S. 40. North of the road, houses were said to be substantial and well maintained, with well-fed livestock outside and literate, well-schooled inhabitants within. Village greens, white church steeples, town hall belfries, and green-shuttered houses were the norm. South of the road, farm buildings were unpainted, the people were poorer and less educated, and the better homes were built with brick in Greco-Roman style. “As you travel north across Ohio,” Ohio State University dean Harlan Hatcher wrote in 1945, “you feel that you have been transported from Virginia into Connecticut.” There were exceptions (Yankees skipped over the marshlands of Indiana and northeastern Ohio en route to Michigan and Illinois), and between Appalachian “Virginia” and Yankee “Connecticut” one passed through a Midland transition zone. But the general observation holds true: the place we call “the Midwest” is actually divided into east-west cultural bands running all the way out to the Mississippi River and beyond.5 Foreign immigrants
[(kindle location 2877)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2877)

> Other groups who fundamentally disagreed with New England values avoided the region on account of the Yankees’ reputation for minding other people’s business and pressuring newcomers to conform to their cultural norms. Catholics—whether Irish, south German, or Italian—did not appreciate the Yankee educational system, correctly recognizing that the schools were designed to assimilate their children into Yankee culture. In areas where Catholic immigrants cohabitated with Yankees, the newcomers created their own parallel system of parochial schools precisely to protect their children from the Yankee mold. Yankees often reacted with hostility, denouncing Catholic immigrants as unwitting tools of a Vaticandirected conspiracy to bring down the republic. Whenever possible, Catholic immigrants chose to live in the more tolerant, multicultural Midlands or in individualistic Appalachia, where moral crusaders were looked upon as self-righteous and irritating.
[(kindle location 2894)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2894)

> Political scientists investigating voting patterns have probed electoral records dating back to the early nineteenth century, matching pollingplace returns with demographic information about each precinct. The results have been startling. Previous assumptions about class or occupation being the key factors influencing voter choices have turned out to be completely wrong, with the nineteenth-century Midwest providing some of the most intriguing evidence that ethnographic origins trumped all other considerations from 1850 onward. Poor white German Catholic miners in northern Wisconsin tended to vote entirely differently from poor white English Methodist miners in the same area. English Congregationalists tended to vote alike regardless of whether they lived in cities or on farms. Scandinavian immigrants voted with native-born Yankees in opposition to candidates and policies preferred by immigrant Irish Catholics or native-born Southern Baptists of Appalachian origin.8
[(kindle location 2904)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2904)

> An essentially theocratic society, New England produced an unusual number of intense religious personalities—people, in the words of the late historian Frederick Merk, “eager to get into direct touch with God, to see God in person, to hear His voice from on high.”
[(kindle location 2927)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2927)

> While religious orthodoxy in New England was undermined during the nineteenth century, the deep-seated Yankee belief that it was possible to make earthly society resemble God’s kingdom above remained intact. Lyman Beecher and other members of the orthodox elite would fight a ferocious rearguard action against the insurgents, but the effort was ultimately futile. The Yankee moral project was by no means over, however. Its greatest battles lay just ahead and would be waged against its rival nations to the south.
[(kindle location 2960)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2960)

## CHAPTER 16:  The Midlands Spread West
> As New Englanders headed west across the northern tier of the Northwest Territory, land-hungry settlers from the Midlands were pouring into the central Midwest. The Midlanders—a great many of them German speaking—carried their pluralistic culture into the Heartland, a place long since identified with neighborliness, family-centered progress, practical politics, and a distrust of big government. Spanning the north-central portions of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, the Greater Midlands spread through central and southern Iowa, northern Missouri, eastern Nebraska and Kansas, and even northernmost Texas—an area many times greater than its original hearth on the shores of the Delaware Bay. Its settlements—a collection of mutually tolerant ethnic enclaves—served as a buffer between the intolerant, communitarian morality of Greater Yankeedom and the individualistic hedonism of Greater Appalachia, just as they had earlier on the eastern seaboard. New Englanders and Appalachian people often settled among them, but neither group’s values took hold. The Midland Midwest would develop as a center of moderation and tolerance, where people of many faiths and ethnicities lived side by side, largely minding their own business. Few Midwestern Midlanders were Quakers, but they unconsciously carried aspects of William Penn’s vision to fruition.
[(kindle location 2964)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2964)

> “Avoid settling in those states where negro slavery prevails,” a Philadelphia newspaper advised would-be emigrants to the west. “Your children will be corrupted by their vices and the slave lords will never treat you like Christians or fellow citizens.” To settle in Yankee-dominated Michigan or Wisconsin, meanwhile, meant putting up with the New Englanders’ irritating desire to make everyone into a Yankee. Many Midlanders did ultimately put down roots there (Milwaukee would declare itself the “German capital of America”), but they had to expend time and energy resisting Yankee attempts to close their beer gardens on the Sabbath, to force English-only public schools on their children, and to stamp out their Germanness. In the Midland zone, foreigners, Catholics, and others found a society untroubled by diversity but skeptical of slave labor, warfare, and the cult of the individual.
[(kindle location 2983)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2983)

Note: John!

Germans had many reasons to abandon central Europe, where forty independent German states were squabbling over the great issues raised by the French Revolution: the legitimacy of feudalism, monarchies, and an economic system in which most people lived in dire poverty. Efforts to unify the region into a single state under a representative government failed in 1848, and many Germans looked to escape the military autocracy that followed. Even before the collapse of the so-called ’48 Revolution, liberals had wished for a place where they could build a New Germany, a model for the democratic, egalitarian society they had hoped their own splintered nation could become. “The foundations of a new and free Germany in the great north American republic can be laid by us,” the leader of one German colonization expedition to the American Midwest told his followers in 1833. “We may in at least one of the American territories create a state that is German from its foundations up, in which all those to whom the future here at home may seem . . . intolerable, can find refuge.”
[(kindle location 2996)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2996)

Note: my great great great grandfather

The flow of Quaker migrants was much smaller, but they were drawn to the Midland Midwest for similar reasons. In the early nineteenth century, Friends still sought to separate themselves from the world, and many found it harder and harder to do so on the densely populated eastern seaboard. During the course of the century, a number of Quaker enclaves outside of the Midlands relocated to Ohio and Central Indiana. Disgusted by slavery, century-old Quaker communities abandoned Tidewater and the Deep South. Indiana eclipsed Philadelphia as the center of North American Quakers in the 1850s. To this day, Richmond, Indiana, is second only to the City of Brotherly Love in total Quaker population. Nestled among communities of Germans, Scots-Irish, English Methodists, Moravians, Amish, and others, the Quakers had found a cultural landscape almost identical to that of southeastern Pennsylvania.5
[(kindle location 3012)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3012)

Note: Earlham! (I did my first year in college at Earlham, a quaker school in Richmond Indiana.)

The Germans set the tone, generally buying land with the intent to build lasting family homesteads rather than as speculative investments. They sought a permanent, organic connection to their land, taking unusual care to ensure its long-term productivity through soil and forest conservation measures first perfected on the tiny farm plots of central Europe. Whether arriving from Europe or Pennsylvania, they built their homes from stone whenever possible, as it was more durable than the wood used by the Yankees or Appalachian people.6 Scholars have observed that the Germans insisted on entering the American melting pot collectively, on their own terms, and bearing ingredients they felt the country was lacking. Germans arriving from Europe usually had a higher standard of education, craftsmanship, and farming knowledge than most of their American neighbors, whom they found grasping and uncultured. “Americans are in their regard for art half-barbarian,” immigrant Gustave Koerner remarked in 1834, “and their taste is not much better than that of the Indian aborigines, who stick metal rings through their noses.” The Germans avoided assimilating, using their language in schools and newspapers and almost exclusively marrying other Germans as late as the 1880s. In a country rushing madly toward the frontier, the Germans distinguished themselves by their emphasis on stable, permanent, rooted communities, where families would work the same piece of land for generations. This rootedness would be perhaps their most lasting contribution to the culture of the Midlands and, by extension, the American Midwest.7
[(kindle location 3022)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3022)

## CHAPTER 17:  Appalachia Spreads West
> It is little wonder that historians have long identified the Appalachian people with the frontier. Borderlanders were the first to move across the Appalachians, forcing their way into Native American territory in the immediate aftermath of the American Revolution. They were founding renegade governments like Transylvania and the State of Franklin long before the Continental Congress got around to creating the Northwest Territory or conquering the Indians that lived within it. Yankees and Midlanders generally waited until federal military forces had defeated Indian peoples before moving into their lands; Borderlanders often carried out the conquest themselves. While New Englanders were still colonizing upstate New York, Appalachian folk were rafting down the Ohio River to stake out claims in southern Indiana and Illinois. By the time Midlanders reached Ohio, Borderlanders were skirmishing with Cherokees in central Tennessee. They were very often on the cutting edge of Euro-American expansion because of their willingness—even desire—to live beyond the effective reach of government.
[(kindle location 3057)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3057)

> Most accounts of Midwestern Borderlanders come from the voluminous writings of Yankee neighbors and visitors to the region, who were generally shocked by their poverty. Philadelphia physician Richard Lee Mason crossed southern Indiana in the winter of 1819 and described coming upon “one of the most miserable huts ever seen,” a pile of slabs laid against a pigsty containing a woman and “two shivering and almost starving children,” all of them bareheaded and barefoot; the father was “absent in search of bread.” One farmer reported, “Southern Illinois has been a city of refuge for the poor people of the Slave States. I saw children here . . . last year, eat dirt, they were so hungry.” Midwestern Yankees took to calling the Borderlanders “butternuts”—a reference to the color of their crude homespun clothes. “Hoosier”—a Southern slang term for a frontier hick—was adopted as a badge of honor by the Appalachian people of Indiana.2
[(kindle location 3084)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3084)

> “The great God of Nature has placed us in different situations,” Cherokee elder Corn Tassel told negotiators at a Revolutionary-era peace conference. “It is true he has endowed you with many superior advantages; but he has not created us to be your slaves. We are a separate people.”12
[(kindle location 3156)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3156)

> By the end of the eighteenth century, a mixed-blood Cherokee upper class had formed whose members spoke English, converted to Christianity, and could act as cultural interlocutors. As president, Thomas Jefferson had urged the Cherokee “to go on learning to cultivate the Earth,” promising that “in time, you will be as we are.” Their mixed-race elite took this advice to heart, encouraging their people to emulate the Tidewater ways of Jefferson’s Virginia.
[(kindle location 3161)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3161)

> Unfortunately for the Cherokee, the growing population and influence of Appalachia launched a Borderlander warrior into the White House in 1829, one with little patience for the rule of law or tolerance for people of other races.
[(kindle location 3172)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3172)

> Indians, he would later tell Congress, “have neither the intelligence, the industry, the moral habits, nor the desire of improvement which are essential to any favorable change in their condition. Established in the midst of another and a superior race, and without appreciating the causes of their inferiority or seeking to control them, they must necessarily yield to the force of circumstances and ere long disappear.”14
[(kindle location 3179)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3179)

Note: jackson

mobbed the White House, destroying furniture and breaking thousands of dollars’ worth of china and glassware in their haste “to get the refreshments, punch and other articles” inside. “The noisy and disorderly rabble in the President’s House brought to my mind descriptions I had read, of the mobs in the Tuileries and at Versailles,” one witness wrote. “I fear [if such people] get the Power in their hands, that of all tyrants, they [would be] the most ferocious, cruel and despotic.”
[(kindle location 3187)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3187)

> He then drafted and put forward the obscene Indian Removal Bill, a measure to ethnically cleanse the Cherokee and neighboring nations and to relocate them a thousand miles to the west in the arid plains of Oklahoma. The measure passed the House by only five votes, with Yankeedom and the Midlands opposed and the Deep South enthusiastically supportive. Meanwhile, the Supreme Court ruled Georgia’s annexation of Cherokee territory unconstitutional, as it violated the tribe’s treaty with the federal government. Georgia and the Jackson administration simply ignored the decision.
[(kindle location 3198)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3198)

> Appalachia, the immediate beneficiary, was actually split on the annexations, with Tennessee’s famous Davy Crockett denouncing on the House floor the Indian Removal Act as “oppression with a vengeance.”
[(kindle location 3205)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3205)

> Leading brawlers grew out their fingernails, hardened them in candle flames, and slicked them with oil to more easily remove their opponent’s eyeballs.
[(kindle location 3216)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3216)

> But while Yankee frontiersmen joined or invented faiths that emphasized good works, utopian communities, and righteous behavior, Borderlanders were drawn to those that stressed individual salvation, a bilateral relationship with God, and the rewards of the next world.
[(kindle location 3223)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3223)

> Their ancestors in Scotland and Ulster had participated in Presbyterian “holy fairs,” huge outdoor events where thousands of worshippers cried, swooned, and otherwise interacted with the divine.
[(kindle location 3226)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3226)

## CHAPTER 18:  The Deep South Spreads West
> It’s often argued that prior to the 1830s, “the South” looked upon slavery as an embarrassment, an anachronistic institution that should be allowed to fade away. But after 1830 “Southerners” increasingly celebrated the practice, championing its expansion across the continent and even casting it as a virtuous institution endorsed by the Bible.
[(kindle location 3238)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3238)

> But during the 1820s and 1830s, Tidewater lost most of its power and influence to the rapidly expanding Deep South. Hemmed in by Borderlanders, Tidewater was unable to meaningfully expand its influence westward during the great migrations of the early nineteenth century. Meanwhile, the people of Appalachia and the Deep South rapidly extended the area under their respective cultures’ control.
[(kindle location 3252)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3252)

> The Deep South grew nearly tenfold in territory in this period, expanding the number of statehouses under its dominion from two to six. With
[(kindle location 3255)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3255)

> Appalachian herdsmen, hunters, and small farmers tended to sell out and move on when land prices rose. They found ready buyers, particularly after 1791, when Connecticut Yankee Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin, which made cotton processing more efficient and profitable. In this way the Deep South wrested control of much of the South Carolina and Georgia backcountry from Borderlanders in the opening years of the nineteenth century, then expanded across much of Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, northern Florida, and Louisiana, and on to western Tennessee, eastern Arkansas, and Texas. As it did so, it expanded its share of world cotton production from 9 percent in 1801 to 68 percent in 1850, even as global production tripled.2 The cotton boom produced a simultaneous explosion in the demand for slaves.
[(kindle location 3264)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3264)

> Ira Berlin has called the “Second Middle Passage.”
[(kindle location 3273)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3273)

> Denmark Vesey organized thousands of slaves to rise up, slay their masters, seize Charleston, and escape by ship to the free black state of Haiti. The plot was thwarted when Vesey was betrayed by slave informants, and he and thirtyfour colleagues were hanged. In response, Charlestonians established a military school called The Citadel, charged with training their youth to suppress future slave insurrections.
[(kindle location 3278)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3278)

> Theirs was a democracy modeled on the slave states of ancient Greece and Rome, whose elites had been free to pursue the finer things in life after delegating all drudgery to slaves and a disenfranchised underclass. The Southern gentry were superior to northerners because they had a “nobility to cultivate some of the higher and more ennobling traits of humanity,” according to one Deep Southern political boss. Yankees, this boss added, were a “nation of shop keepers” while Deep Southerners were a “race of statesmen, orators, military leaders and gentlemen equal and probably superior to any now existing on this or any other continent.” They were also spared the “ignorance, bigotry, and envy resulting from an oppressed and starving laboring class” by the presence of slaves. Following the philosophy of libertas, theorists such as South Carolina chancellor William Harper declared that humans are “born to subjection,” and that it was in “the order of nature and of God that the beings of superior faculties and knowledge, and superior power, should control and dispose of those who are inferior.” On the eve of the Civil War, Alexander Stephens of Georgia gave a speech condemning the Founding Fathers for “the assumption of the equality of races,” an idea that was “fundamentally wrong.” The Confederacy, he asserted, “rests upon the great truth that the negro is not equal to the white man; that slavery subordination to the superior race is his natural and normal condition.” This statement represented mainstream opinion in the Deep South: Stephens was the Confederacy’s vice president.4
[(kindle location 3283)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3283)

> Southern Baptist and Methodist preachers broke with their northern counterparts to endorse slavery on the grounds that Africans were descendants of Ham, who was condemned in the Bible to be a “hewer of wood and drawer of water” for his white masters. Slave lords welcomed the proselytizing of such ideas among the black population. They found allies among Appalachian Presbyterians like the influential northern Alabama minister, the Reverend Fred A. Ross. “Man south of the Equator—in Asia, Australia, Oceanica, America, especially Africa—is inferior to his Northern brother,” Ross wrote in his 1857 opus, Slavery Ordained of God. “Slavery is of God, and [should] continue for the good of the slave, the good of the master, the good of the whole American family.”5
[(kindle location 3295)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3295)

> As tensions over slavery increased, Deep Southerners began asserting their racial superiority over Yankees as well. The region’s thinkers reaffirmed the thesis that they belonged to a master Norman race, separate from and superior to the Yankee Anglo-Saxons. “The Cavaliers, Jacobites, and Huguenots who settled the South naturally hate, contemn [sic] and despise the Puritans who settled the North,” the Deep South’s leading journal, DeBow’s Review, declared. “The former are master races—the latter a slave race, the descendants of Saxon serfs . . . [who] came from the cold and marshy regions of the North, where man is little more than a cold-blooded amphibious biped.” “We are the most aristocratic people in the world,” DeBow’s continued. “Pride of caste and color and privilege makes every white man an aristocrat in feeling. Aristocracy is the only safe guard of liberty, the only power watchful and strong enough to exclude monarchical despotism.” Another paper proclaimed, “The Norman cavalier cannot brook into the vulgar familiarity of the Saxon Yankee, while the latter is continually devising some plan to bring down his aristocratic neighbor to his own detested level.”6
[(kindle location 3301)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3301)

> There were also schemes to annex Nicaragua. When an Appalachian mercenary named William Walker seized control of the tiny Central American republic in 1856, his first act as “president” was to reestablish slavery, hoping to win Deep Southern support. His plan worked. Accolades poured in from Deep Southern newspapers. The New Orleans Daily Delta proclaimed Nicaragua a “home for Southern men.” The Selma Sentinel proclaimed Walker’s actions to be more vital to the South than any other “movement on Earth.”12
[(kindle location 3361)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3361)

> Deep Southerners rallied around a secretive group called the Knights of the Golden Circle, which sought to create an even larger slave empire than Walker had. The “Golden Circle” was centered on Cuba, and its curve took in the Deep South, Mexico, Central America, part of South America, and the entire West Indies. The Knights’ founder, a Tidewater-born, Kentucky-based magazine editor named George Bickley, estimated Mexico alone would yield twenty-five new slave states with fifty senators and sixty representatives. It would guarantee Deep Southern hegemony over the federal government (if the Union survived) or “every element of national wealth and power” for a “Southern Confederacy” (if it did not). With the core of its support in east Texas and Georgia, the Knights plotted to conquer all of Mexico.14
[(kindle location 3372)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3372)

## CHAPTER 19:  Conquering El Norte
> By the time the slave lords’ eyes turned its way, El Norte was in an extremely vulnerable position. Mexico was born into bankruptcy and chaos in 1821, its economy destroyed in a bloody war for independence that had killed a tenth of its people. Gross national product fell by half and would not recover its 1805 level until the 1870s. Governments in far-off Mexico City fell with alarming frequency—the presidency changed hands thirty-six times between 1833 and 1855—leaving the provinces largely on their own.1 What little support El Norte had received from central authorities broke down in the aftermath of independence. Soldiers and missionaries stopped receiving their pay. The money supply disappeared. Caravans no longer arrived to resupply the region’s outposts and to carry away the hides and tallow it produced. Soldiers began sacking mission complexes in search of provisions. Franciscan missionaries were banned from entering Mexico, and El Norte officials received orders to expel the rest.
[(kindle location 3380)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3380)

> Under Mexican law, Anglo-Americans were unwelcome, but Texas officials were desperate enough for settlers to look the other way. “I cannot help seeing advantages which . . . would result if we admitted honest, hard working people, regardless of what country they come from . . . even Hell itself,” said San Antonio politico Francisco Ruiz.3
[(kindle location 3400)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3400)

> “As one covers the distance from San Antonio to [Nacogdoches] he will note that Mexican influence is proportionately diminished until, arriving in this place, he will see that it is almost nothing,” he wrote his superiors.
[(kindle location 3415)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3415)

> Initially, moderates like Austin and Seguín sought merely to separate from Coahuila but remain a part of Mexico, a position that earned them the epithet “Tories” from east Texas’s Appalachian and Deep Southern settlers, who wanted outright independence.
[(kindle location 3441)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3441)

> Even the moderate Stephen Austin characterized Texans’ struggle for independence as “a war of barbarism and of despotic principles, waged by the mongrel Spanish-Indian and Negro race against civilization and the Anglo-American race.”9
[(kindle location 3456)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3456)

> creating the state’s classic divides between Houston and Dallas, the Hill Country and the coastal plain, the Hispanic south and the Anglo-dominated north. The northern panhandle would later emerge as a land apart, settled as it was by Midlanders.11
[(kindle location 3471)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3471)

> As in many future conflicts, opposition to the Mexican-American War was concentrated in Yankeedom, which viewed it as an imperial war of conquest and a betrayal of republican values and pietistic Christian morality. “Who believes that a score of victories over Mexico, the ‘annexation’ of half her provinces, will give us more Liberty, a purer Morality, a more prosperous industry, than we now have?” asked one prominent critic, the Yankee-born newspaperman Horace Greeley. “Murder [cannot] be hid from the sight of God by a few flimsy rags called banners.... Awake and arrest the work of butchery ere it shall be too late to preserve your souls from the guilt of wholesale slaughter!” The Massachusetts legislature, for its part, denounced it as a “war against freedom, against humanity, against justice” because it had “the triple object of extending slavery, of strengthening slave power, and of obtaining the control of the Free States.”12
[(kindle location 3479)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3479)

## CHAPTER 20:  Founding the Left Coast
> Why is it that the coastal zone in northern California, Oregon, and Washington seems to have so much more in common with New England than it does with other parts of those states? From voting behavior to culture wars to foreign policy, why has the Left Coast found itself allied with Yankeedom—and at odds with its neighbors to the south and west—since its foundation? The primary reason is that the majority of the Left Coast’s early colonists were Yankees who arrived by sea in the hopes of founding a second New England on the shores of the Pacific. And while they didn’t fully succeed in this mission—the Left Coast has always had fundamental temperamental differences from its eastern ally—they left a stamp of utopian idealism that put this young nation on a collision course with its neighbors in deferential El Norte and the libertarian Far West.
[(kindle location 3509)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3509)

> In May 1843 Yankee settlers in the territory held a meeting at which they set up their own provisional government, drafted laws prohibiting slavery, and elected officers; three-quarters of those elected were from New England. The document would later form the basis for Oregon’s state constitution.4
[(kindle location 3545)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3545)

> This settlement pattern continued throughout the 1840s and 1850s, leaving New England–born Yankees outnumbered fifteen to one but still in control of most civic institutions. 5 In Oregon, which split from what became British Columbia in 1846 and from Washington in 1853, the Yankees dominated the scene to a remarkable degree. Salem and Portland were founded by New Englanders, the latter named by a native of Portland, Maine, after winning a coin toss with a Bostonian. The state’s first and most influential newspaper, the Oregon Statesman, was founded, owned, and operated by Yankees, as was its rival, The Oregonian, which promoted a Beecher-like fear of Catholic immigrants. Yankees ran most of the public schools, colleges, and seminaries and dominated debate at the Constitutional Convention of 1857, which produced a document championing communities of independent family farmers and the very Yankee notion that individual interests must be subsumed for the common good. Six of the first eight state governors and six of the first eight U.S senators were Yankees from New England, New York, or the Wyoming Valley of Pennsylvania.6
[(kindle location 3552)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3552)

> If California’s north-south split was already apparent by 1845, the 1848 discovery of gold in the American River Valley helped divide the Left Coast from the until-then unpopulated interior. This division—presaging that which would soon divide the older, coastal Pacific Northwest from the arid lands over the Cascades—was largely due to the Yankee presence around San Francisco Bay and adjacent sections of the Pacific seaboard. Even more than their counterparts in Oregon, these Yankees were compelled by a particular mission: they had to save California from the barbarians.
[(kindle location 3590)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3590)

> “The principle is to get all of the wealth of the land possible in the shortest possible time, and then go elsewhere to enjoy it.”10 In what
[(kindle location 3596)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3596)

> Within twenty-four months San Francisco grew from a village of 800 to a city of 20,000. Its harbor was filled with derelict ships abandoned by their gold-hungry crews, and the pubs, gambling houses, brothels, knife fights, criminal gangs, and drunken parties that followed in their wake were worthy of Port Royal in the time of the buccaneers.
[(kindle location 3599)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3599)

> Asia. “If we can plant [in California] a people with our civilization, our Bible, our Puritanism, our zeal for spreading what we know and believe to others, it will be a direct means of pouring light upon the Isles of the Sea and the land of Sinim [Sin] that lies beyond,” the society’s journal proclaimed on the eve of the great enterprise. “It is the will of God to make some great use of the new movement towards Oregon and California.”11
[(kindle location 3606)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3606)

> school. By 1853 the San Francisco school board was entirely staffed by New Englanders, who made the Boston curriculum mandatory in the city. Sherman Day, the son of the president of Yale, joined a group of New England lawyers and clergymen to help transform a Congregational preparatory school into the College of California, which is now the University of California at Berkeley; most of the professors at the “Yale of the West” were New Englanders.
[(kindle location 3618)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3618)

## CHAPTER 21:  War for the West
> The Civil War era has long been portrayed as a struggle between “the North” and “the South,” two regions that, culturally and politically, didn’t actually exist. Historians have danced around the problem, offering a variety of terms to try to support the flawed paradigm: Border South, Middle South, Upper South, Lower South, Cotton South, Border North, or Upper North. They’ve agonized over the deep internal divisions in Maryland and Missouri, Tennessee and Louisiana, Indiana, Virginia, and Texas. They’ve argued over whether or not the war was fought for slavery or whether it was a struggle between Celts and their Anglo and Teutonic rivals. Any state-by-state analysis inevitably produces results that are confusing and unsatisfactory. Seen through the lens of the continent’s ethnoregional nations, the parties’ motivations, allegiances, and behaviors become clearer.
[(kindle location 3643)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3643)

> raised. Spurred by their mission to improve the world, however, Yankees were not about to ignore it and the moral affront it presented and became the undisputed center of the abolitionist movement. A Connecticut Yankee, William Lloyd Garrison, founded and published the leading antislavery journal, The Liberator. Lyman Beecher’s daughter, Harriet Beecher Stowe, wrote the hugely popular Uncle Tom’s Cabin, which mobilized the public against federal laws requiring U.S. citizens to return runaway slaves to their masters. Frederick Douglass, an escaped Tidewater slave, found refuge in Massachusetts, where he became one of the American federation’s most powerful abolitionist voices. When the federal government decided to allow the citizens of the new Kansas Territory to decide whether they would allow local slavery, Bostonians created the New England Emigrant Society, which founded the Kansas towns of Lawrence and Manhattan and helped populate the territory with Yankees. When Appalachian-born residents sacked and burned Lawrence in 1856, another Connecticut-born Yankee, John Brown, slaughtered five men in retaliation; he later tried to provoke a slave rebellion by seizing a federal arsenal in western Virginia in an operation that established him among Yankees as a martyred freedom fighter and as a notorious terrorist to Deep Southern and Tidewater people.

> Yankee abolitionists argued that the Deep South and Tidewater were autocratic despotisms. Slave lords’ absolute power over those under them, they argued, led to corruption of the family and Christian virtue. “The slave states are one vast brothel,” declared English-born Congregational minister George Bourne, in a pamphlet published in Boston. Slave masters and their sons raped their slaves, he and others charged, accounting for the large number of mixed-race children born to slave mothers. “It is so common for the female slaves to have white children that little or nothing is ever said about it,” Connecticut minister Francis Hawley reported from the Deep South in Theodore Dwight Weld’s American Slavery as It Is, a best-selling abolitionist anthology published in 1839. Another contributor, a Connecticut justice of the peace, described how a Tidewater North Carolina planter offered a friend of his $ 20 for each slave he impregnated. “This offer was no doubt made for the purpose of improving the stock,” he added, “on the same principle that farmers endeavor to improve their cattle by crossing the breed.” Southern newspaper classifieds were reprinted in abolitionist publications to publicize the fact that slave families were regularly broken up to pay debts, often by selling off toddlers or even a spouse. The “domestic institution,” they argued, was a threat to domesticity itself. 2
[(kindle location 3677)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3677)

> In response to Yankee and Midland abolitionists, the Deep South’s leaders developed an elaborate defense for human bondage. James Henry Hammond, former governor of South Carolina, published a seminal book arguing that enslaved laborers were happier, fitter, and better looked after than their “free” counterparts in Britain and the North, who were ruthlessly exploited by industrial capitalists. Free societies were therefore unstable, as there was always a danger that the exploited would rise up, creating “a fearful crisis in Republican institutions.” Slaves, by contrast, were kept in their place by violent means and denied the right to vote, resist, or testify, ensuring the “foundation of every well-designed and durable” republic. Enslavement of the white working class would be, in his words, “a most glorious act of emancipation.” Jefferson’s notion that “all men are created equal,” he wrote, was “ridiculously absurd.” In the Deep Southern tradition, Hammond’s republic was modeled on those of ancient Greece and Rome, featuring rights and democracy for the elite, slavery and submission for inferiors. It was sanctioned by the Christian God, whose son never denounced the practice in his documented teachings. It was a perfect aristocratic republic, one that should be a model for the world.4 Hammond mocked his Puritan critics as “learned old maids” who liked to “linger with such an insatiable relish” on bizarre and pornographic fantasies of masters raping slaves. The “proportion” of mulattos in the Deep South, he argued, was vanishingly small, and could be accounted for by the presence of Yankee perverts in the region’s larger towns. He called the sexual charges—an existential threat to the Deep South’s racially based caste system—“ridiculously false,” the product of “a game played too often on Tourists in this country.” But the charges were true, as Hammond well knew. Scholars later discovered in his private papers that in 1839 Hammond had purchased an eighteen-year-old slave and her twoyear-old daughter, commencing sexual relationships first with the mother and later with the daughter, and sharing both with his son. His wife—Hammond noted she could not satisfy “his appetites”—eventually learned of the affairs and left the household for many years. The children and/or grandchildren sired by the enslaved mother and daughter were kept on the estate, because Hammond could not tolerate the idea that “any of my children or possible children [would be] slaves of strangers. Slavery in the family will be their happiest earthly condition.”5

> The planters celebrated slavery because it ensured the stability and perpetuation of a republican aristocracy. “The planters are a genuine aristocracy, who cultivate themselves in a leisure founded on slavery,” London Times correspondent William Russell reported from South Carolina on the eve of war. “The admiration for monarchical institutions on the English model, for privileged classes and for a landed aristocracy and gentry is undisguised and apparently genuine.” One planter told Russell: “If we could only get one of the Royal race of England to rule over us, we should be content.” Many others expressed regret for the revolution, noting they “would go back tomorrow if they could.” 6

> The planters’ loathing of Yankees startled outsiders. “South Carolina, I am told, was founded by gentlemen, [not by] witch-burning Puritans, by cruel persecuting fanatics who implanted in the north . . . [and her] newlyborn colonies all the ferocity, bloodthirstiness, and rabid intolerance of the Inquisition,” Russell reported. “There is nothing in all the dark caves of human passion so cruel and deadly as the hatred the South Carolinians profess for the Yankees,” he continued. “New England is to [them] the incarnation of moral and political wickedness and social corruption . . . the source of everything which South Carolina hates.” Another planter told him that if the Mayflower had sunk, “we should never have been driven to these extremes.”7
[(kindle location 3733)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3733)

> Davis, confident that the three aforementioned nations would side with the Confederacy in time of war, ignored Lathers’s advice. It would prove one of the worst miscalculations in North American history.9
[(kindle location 3770)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3770)

> disrupted. As the local Evening Post reported in 1860, “The City of New York belongs almost as much to the South as to the North.”10 In the 1860 election every single county in New Netherland went for Lincoln’s opponent, Stephen Douglas, including northern New Jersey, western Long Island, and the southern Hudson Valley. In the aftermath, most New Netherlanders wanted to see the Confederate states leave the Union in peace.
[(kindle location 3781)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3781)

> Faced with the possibility of a national dissolution, most Midland political and opinion leaders hoped to join the Appalachian-controlled states to create a Central Confederacy stretching from New Jersey to Arkansas. The proposed nation would serve as a neutral buffer area between Yankeedom and the Deep South, preventing the antagonists from going to war with each other. John Pendleton Kennedy, a Baltimore publisher and former congressman, championed this “Confederacy of Border States,” which opposed both the Deep South’s program of expansion by conquest and the Yankee plans to preserve the Union by force. It was, he argued, the “natural and appropriate medium through which the settlement of all differences is eventually to be obtained.” Maryland’s governor, Thomas Hicks, saw merit in the proposal, which could preserve the peace in a state split between Midland, Appalachian, and Tidewater sections; he corresponded with governors of Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware, Ohio, and Missouri (all of which had substantial Midland sections) plus New York and Virginia to lay the groundwork for such an alliance should the Union break up.13
[(kindle location 3810)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3810)

> But the Deep South lost all Midland support after Sumter. In Philadelphia, Easton, and West Chester—Pennsylvania communities that had previously been centers of secessionist sympathy—mobs destroyed pro-Southern newspaper offices, drove pro-Southern politicians from their homes, assaulted secessionists in the streets, and forced homes and businesses to display Union flags. In Maryland the Central Confederacy proposal became obsolete overnight; Midland and Appalachian sections rallied to the Union, Tidewater ones to the Southern Confederacy. Their flag attacked, Midland sections of Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri threw in their lot with the Yankees.14
[(kindle location 3819)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3819)

> because they owned so much and had the “affection which all men feel for what belongs to them,” which naturally led them to protect and provide for “wives, children, and slaves.”
[(kindle location 3831)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3831)

> Fitzhugh, whose books were enormously popular, declared he was “quite as intent on abolishing Free Society as you [Northerners] are on abolishing slavery.”
[(kindle location 3832)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3832)

> For Tidewater in particular, casting the conflict as a war for Norman liberation from Anglo-Saxon tyranny neatly sidestepped the more problematic slavery issue. The Southern Literary Messenger, Tidewater’s leading journal, conceded in 1861 that “the Round-heads16 may gain many victories in view of their superior strength and their better condition” but assured “they will loose the last [battle] and then sink down to their normal position of relative inferiority.” The journal argued the Confederate aim was to create “a sort of Patrician Republic” ruled by a people “superior to all other races on this continent.”
[(kindle location 3837)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3837)

> This propaganda was embraced in the Deep South as well. In an 1862 speech, Jefferson Davis told Mississippi legislators that their enemies were “a traditionless and homeless race . . . gathered by Cromwell from the bogs and fens of the north of Ireland and of England” to be “disturbers of peace in the world.” The war, DeBow’s Review declared, was a struggle to reverse the ill-conceived American Revolution, which had been contrary to “the natural reverence of the Cavalier for the authority of established forms over mere speculative ideas.” By throwing off monarchy, slaveholders endangered the wondrous “domestic institution” that rested “on the principle of inequality and subordination, and favor[ed] a public policy embodying the ideas of social status.” Democracy “threw political influence into the hands of inorganic masses” and caused “the subjection of the Cavalier to the intellectual thralldom of the Puritan.” Other Tidewater and Deep Southern thinkers came to agree that the struggle was really between respect for established aristocratic order and the dangerous Puritan notion that “the individual man was . . . of higher worth than any system of polity.” As Fitzhugh put it, it was a war “between conservatives and revolutionists; between Christians and infidels . . . the chaste and the libidinous; between marriage and free-love.” Some even championed the dubious notion that the Confederacy was fighting a Huguenot-Anglican counterreformation against Puritan excess. Slavery was not the issue, they argued—defeating democracy was.17 In the 1860 presidential election, Tidewater was split between moderate Bell and secessionist Breckinridge, with Bell’s support concentrated on the eastern shore of Maryland and in Tidewater North Carolina. After South Carolina seceded, Tidewater wished to follow but was thwarted by other nations’ control over Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina’s state governments. Only after Fort Sumter and Lincoln’s call to arms did Virginia and North Carolina secede; Maryland and Delaware never did. In all four cases, the attitude of Borderlanders, not Tidewater folk, was the decisive factor.
[(kindle location 3842)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3842)

Note: wow

On the other hand, Borderlanders had already suffered generations of oppression at the hands of aristocratic slave lords and knew that they were the people the planters had in mind when they talked about enslaving inferior whites.18
[(kindle location 3862)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3862)

> Kentucky-born James G. Birney, a slaveholder turned abolitionist, spoke for many Borderlanders when he denounced the Deep Southern system “by which the majority are to be made poor and miserable that the few may spend their useless lives in indolent voluptuousness.” Indeed, it sought to make ordinary people “lie down at the foot of the Southern Slaveholders ‘like whipt and trembling Spaniels.’ ”19
[(kindle location 3867)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3867)

> Borderlanders became strong supporters of the notion of “popular sovereignty,” the principle by which local residents would decide if a new territory would have slaves or not.
[(kindle location 3871)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3871)

> Altogether a quarter-million men from Appalachian sections of the Confederacy volunteered for Union service, with regiments representing every state save South Carolina. In Pennsylvania, Buchanan declared for the Union, while tens of thousands of Scots-Irish volunteered to punish the Deep Southern traitors. In the Appalachian Midwest most Borderlanders regarded the attack on Sumter as treason and rallied to the Stars and Stripes. “I was a Kentuckian,” one Hoosier told a reporter, “but now I am an American.”21
[(kindle location 3892)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3892)

> The attack on Sumter pushed the Appalachian majority in Pennsylvania, Missouri, Indiana, and western Virginia into the Union camp. Other parts of Appalachia rallied to the Confederacy, regarding Lincoln’s call for troops as a direct attack on their communities. This sentiment was especially strong in lower-lying areas where Appalachian slaveholding was more common: central and western North Carolina, middle Tennessee, southwestern Virginia, and northern Arkansas. In the aftermath of Sumter, these regions supported secession ballot measures, causing their states to join the Confederacy three to four months after the Deep South had created it.22
[(kindle location 3896)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3896)

> With its soldiers maintaining order, thousands of Yankee and Midland schoolteachers, missionaries, businessmen, and government officials were deployed to the three regions. They introduced public education, creating segregated elementary schools and black colleges (many of which exist today). They eliminated laws and practices that enforced the Deep Southern caste system. They ensured that newly freed slaves could vote and stand for office and that former top Confederate officials could not. Fifteen African Americans were elected to the U.S. House of Representatives from the former Confederacy between 1870 and 1877, and two represented black-majority Mississippi in the U.S. Senate.23
[(kindle location 3904)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3904)

> (As a result, the total presidential vote in South Carolina fell from 182,600 in 1876 to 50,000 in 1900, even as the state’s population increased.)
[(kindle location 3913)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3913)

## CHAPTER 22:  Founding the Far West
> The Far West was the last region of North America to be colonized, and for good reason: it was remarkably inhospitable for Euro-Atlantic civilizations, with their emphasis on cropland agriculture, waterdependent plants and animals, and fixed settlements. It began at the ninety-eighth meridian, which bisects the Dakotas, Nebraska, Kansas, and Oklahoma. West of that point, only twenty inches of rain reached the parched earth each year, less than a third of the amount that fell in Mobile, Alabama. From the arid brown prairies of western Nebraska and eastern Colorado to the deserts of Nevada and interior California and the dry, scrubby mountains of interior Oregon and Washington, there were few places where agriculture could survive without the help of extensive irrigation projects. The altitude was so high—even the plains and mountain valleys stood above the tallest summits of the Appalachians—that many familiar crops wouldn’t grow at all, particularly in soils poisoned by alkali salts. Most of the vast region’s rivers were too shallow for navigation, isolating settlers from potential markets for anything they did grow. Its Native American tribes had had two centuries to perfect mounted warfare (after the introduction of horses from El Norte), enabling them to better keep interlopers in check. In the Far West the technologies and techniques of the Appalachian frontiersman were as useless as Yankee and Midlands farming practices. Deep Southern plantation crops couldn’t be grown at all.
[(kindle location 3918)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3918)

> The Mormons—followers of a Yankee-led utopian movement with its origins in Vermont and New York’s Burnt-over District—began arriving on the shores of Utah’s Great Salt Lake in the late 1840s. Fleeing persecution in the Midwest in 1847, they originally intended to settle outside the United States, but their plans were frustrated by the United States–Mexico War and, shortly thereafter, the U.S. annexation of their promised land in the desert. Their leader, Vermont-born Brigham Young, was made the first governor of the Utah Territory in 1850, and two years later 20,000 Mormons were living there. Almost all were from Yankeedom, which explains why in 2000, Utah had the highest percentage of English Americans of any state in the Union, edging out Vermont and Maine. With a communal mind-set and intense group cohesion,
[(kindle location 3954)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3954)

> Within a few years it was no longer necessary for big firms to use fearmongering to work their will; they simply owned Nevada’s legislators and congressional delegation. By 1870 Nevada politics was no longer a struggle between individual producers and corporate interests but simply a clash between competing cartels.
[(kindle location 3983)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=3983)

## CHAPTER 23:  Immigration and Identity
> If the existence of the American nations seems persuasive enough for the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and the first three-quarters of the nineteenth century, one might still ask how they could possibly have survived to the present day. After all, isn’t the United States a nation of immigrants, and Canada, too, for that matter? In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, did we not welcome to our shores tens of millions of people from all over the world, those tired, poor, huddled masses yearning to breathe free who flowed through Ellis and Angel Islands on their way to create the wondrously diverse America of today? Surely the cultures of the regional nations were subsumed by the great multicultural tide of 1830 to 1924, surviving only in the imaginations of a few old-money white Anglo-Saxon Protestants still hiding out in their last scraps of habitat: Nantucket, Harvard Yard, and Skull and Bones reunions. Did not the arrival of millions of Irish, Germans, Italians, Slavs, Jews, Greeks, and Chinese in the course of a single lifetime herald the birth of a genuinely “American” (or, for that matter, “Canadian”) identity that cemented the country together to fight two world wars? The short answer is no.
[(kindle location 4102)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4102)

> A few words on this era of mass immigration. Between 1830 and 1924 some 36 million people emigrated to the United States. They arrived in three distinct waves. The first—the arrival of some 4.5 million Irish, Germans, and British people between 1830 and 1860—has already been touched on; it triggered Yankee fears that those immigrants who were Catholic would undermine the republic through slavish obedience to the Pope, and it motivated New England’s mission to “save the west” by assimilating newcomers to the Yankee Way. The second, between 1860 and 1890, saw twice as many immigrants, largely from the same countries, plus Scandinavia and China. The third wave, from 1890 to 1924, was the largest of all, with some 18 million new arrivals, mostly from southern and eastern Europe (particularly Italy, Greece, and Poland), three-quarters of whom were either Catholic or Jewish; this wave also included many Chinese and caused some alarm among native-born North Americans who feared these new foreigners would be unable to assimilate to local ways. This third wave was cut short in 1924, when the U.S. Congress imposed quotas designed to protect the federation from the taint of “inferior races,” including Italians, Jews, and immigrants from the Balkans and East Europe. Immigration remained restricted—and heavily biased toward northern Europeans—until the early 1950s. Despite the scale of immigration, newcomers were always a small minority. The proportion of foreign-born remained at about 10 percent of the U.S. population throughout the period, peaking at 14 percent in 1914. Its cumulative effect was important but not overwhelming. Even after adding together all immigrants between 1790 and 2000—66 million altogether—and their descendants, demographers have calculated that immigration accounts for only about half the early-twenty-first-century population of the United States. In other words, if the United States had sealed its borders in 1790, in the year 2000 it would still have had a population of about 125 million instead of 250 million. The 1820–1924 immigration was enormous, but it was never truly overpowering.1
[(kindle location 4120)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4120)

Note: immigration

In both nations blacks, Asians, and Hispanics encountered considerable hostility, with Chinese and Japanese treated as an inferior people to be used much like slaves. Japanese children were kept out of California classrooms as late as 1907 on the theory that they lacked the aptitude for higher learning.4 But
[(kindle location 4166)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4166)

> In fact, both sides are evoking characteristics that were true of only a subset of North America’s ethnoregional nations rather than “America” as a whole. Certainly the Calvinist work ethic has always been central to the Yankee identity at the same time that it was anathema to that of the Deep South or Tidewater, where a leisurely “pace of life” has long been seen as virtuous. (No Deep Southern aristocrat feared he would be kept from Heaven on account of idleness; much of the Yankee elite was haunted by this notion.) “Englishness,” language and all, was absolutely not at the heart of the Midlands and New Netherland identity, where multiculturalism was indeed the norm; applied to El Norte, theories of “Anglo-Protestant” cultural origins look comical. Extreme individualism is central to the Appalachian and Far Western identities but has always been frowned upon in communitarian New England and New France. “Liberty” in the sense Huntington thought of it was absolutely not part of the Deep Southern or Tidewater vision of the American identity, while representative government was championed by their slaveholding elite only to the extent that they themselves did all the representing. Far from embracing multiculturalism, Yankees have spent their history either keeping outsiders away or trying to assimilate them (and the rest of the country) to New England norms. It is fruitless to search for the characteristics of an “American” identity, because each nation has its own notion of what being American should mean.
[(kindle location 4222)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4222)

> Failing to recognize this, Huntington’s disciples have done a great deal of hand-wringing about the supposedly exceptional nature of the dominant Mexican stream of the current “fourth wave” of mass immigration. In 1970, 760,000 Mexican-born individuals were living in the United States, or about 1.4 percent of Mexico’s population. In 2008, that number had jumped seventeenfold to 12.7 million, or 11 percent of all native Mexicans on the planet. They comprised 32 percent of the foreign-born population of the United States in 2008, the same proportion as the Irish did in the third quarter of the nineteenth century. The vast majority live in El Norte, where they now constitute an overwhelming majority of the population and see no reason to “assimilate” to some Anglo-Protestant norm. This was enormously alarming to Huntington and to others living outside El Norte, who fear a reconquista is taking place. In a sense they’re correct: Mexicans have retaken control of the American portion of El Norte, and large numbers of immigrants from southern Mexico are becoming assimilated into norteño culture. But this isn’t so much a threat to the “dominant culture” of the region as a return to its origins.9
[(kindle location 4233)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4233)

> “Southwest Chicanos and Norteño Mexicanos are becoming one people again,” University of New Mexico Chicano Studies professor Charles Truxillo told the Associated Press in 2000, adding that the creation of a separate state was inevitable. His suggested name for the new country: the República del Norte.10
[(kindle location 4248)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4248)

## CHAPTER 24:  Gods and Missions
> While immigration reinforced the distinctions between the nations in the decades after the Civil War, differences in fundamental values polarized them into two hostile blocs separated by buffer states. The result was a cultural Cold War pitting an angry, humiliated, and salvation-minded Dixie bloc against a triumphant, social-reform-minded alliance of Yankeedom, New Netherland, and the Left Coast. This culture war would simmer for a century after Appomattox before breaking into open conflict in the 1960s. This chapter traces the formation of these two blocs in the Reconstruction era and the divergent worldviews and cosmology that have kept them in opposition ever since.
[(kindle location 4251)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4251)

> They “freed” an oppressed people—the region’s enslaved blacks—but failed to provide the security or economic environment in which they might thrive. They assumed their natural allies in one region—the Unionist-minded strongholds of Appalachia—would support their effort to remake the zone of occupation in an essentially Yankee image. But despite the backing of military units, the control of broad sectors of government, education, and the economy, and a massive civilian outreach program, not only did the occupation fail to achieve most of its goals, it unified the three southern nations against them to a degree never before seen. Scholars have long recognized that “the South” as a unified entity didn’t really come into existence until after the Civil War. It was the resistance to Yankee-led Reconstruction that brought this Dixie bloc together to ultimately include even Appalachian people who’d fought against the Confederacy during the war.
[(kindle location 4268)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4268)

> Southern Baptists and other southern evangelicals were becoming what religious scholars have termed “Private Protestants” as opposed to the “Public Protestants” that dominated the northern nations, and whom we’ll get to in a moment. Private Protestants—Southern Baptists, Southern Methodists, and Southern Episcopalians among them—believed the world was inherently corrupt and sinful, particularly after the shocks of the Civil War. Their emphasis wasn’t on the social gospel—an effort to transform the world in preparation for Christ’s coming—but rather on personal salvation, pulling individual souls into the lifeboat of right thinking before the Rapture swept the damned away. Private Protestants had no interest in changing society but rather emphasized the need to maintain order and obedience.
[(kindle location 4278)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4278)

> The righteous cause was, conveniently enough, to promote the folkways of the Deep South to the greatest degree possible, upholding the classical Roman idea of the slaveholding republic, prescribing democracy for the elite and obedience for everyone else.3
[(kindle location 4298)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4298)

Note: this is finally dead and the public church is rising in the south a la Huntsville Alabama meeting

Appalachia’s staggering poverty—made worse by war and economic dislocation—created a situation in which many white Borderlanders found themselves in direct competition with newly freed blacks, who tended to be less deferential than those in the lowlands. The response was the creation of a secret society of homicidal vigilantes called the Ku Klux Klan. The original Reconstruction-era Klan was founded in Pulaski, Tennessee, and remained almost entirely an Appalachian phenomenon, a warrior order committed to crushing that nation’s enemies. Klansmen tortured and killed “uppity” blacks, terrorized or murdered Yankee schoolteachers, burned schoolhouses, and assaulted judges and other officials associated with the occupation. Revealingly, it was disbanded on the orders of its own Grand Wizard in 1869 because the Dixie bloc’s white elite had become concerned that it was encouraging the lower white orders to think and act on their own.4
[(kindle location 4307)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4307)

> The caste system became so secure that when sociologists from the University of Chicago came to study it in the 1930s, citizens openly bragged of participating in the torture and murder of blacks who failed to show “proper respect” for whites. (“When a nigger gets ideas,” a government official in Mississippi told the researchers, “the best thing to do is to get him under ground as quick as possible.”)
[(kindle location 4317)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4317)

> Whereas late-nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century Southern Baptists and other salvation-minded denominations generally judged alcoholism as an individual failing of character, Yankee Congregationalists, Northern Methodists, Unitarians, and Anglicans viewed it as a social ill in need of legislative redress. While Salvationists concentrated on saving the souls of the poor, champions of the Social Gospel fought for labor protections, the minimum wage, and other collective solutions intended to reduce poverty itself. Whereas Private Protestants emphasized individual responsibility for one’s lot in life, Public Protestants tried to harness government to improve society and the quality of life. These conflicting worldviews put the two blocs on a political collision course.6
[(kindle location 4332)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4332)

> Reconstruction was but the first large-scale social engineering effort by the Northern coalition. When Yankee teachers became disillusioned with the slow pace of their efforts to educate and uplift former slaves in the Deep South and Tidewater, many turned their attention to Appalachian whites, who were seen as people much like their “forefathers on the bleak New England shore.” Borderlanders began to enter popular consciousness in the North in the 1880s and 1890s, when a series of literary and scholarly articles appeared painting them as a people marooned in an eighteenth-century time warp, consumed by feuds and fixated on witchcraft and other superstitions. Studies falsely proclaimed that the Appalachian people spoke Elizabethan English and were “uncontaminated with slavery.” The Yankee-born president of Kentucky’s Berea College, Congregational minister William Goodell Frost, committed to bringing the “saving elements” of modern civilization to Appalachia, which would turn it into “the New England of the South.” Hundreds of Yankee-run freedmen’s schools were constructed across the region through the 1930s. By the eve of World War II the effort had lost its momentum—and had been forced out of parts of the southern mountains—but the region remained a place of abject poverty.7
[(kindle location 4338)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4338)

> Yankees and New Netherlanders also led the turn-of-the-century crusades to ensure the welfare of children. These two groups were responsible for a radical reduction in infant mortality (by the development, in Rochester, N.Y., Massachusetts, and New York City, of a system to distribute hygienic, subsidized milk supplies to mothers); for the advent and expansion of playgrounds for urban children (Massachusetts required citizens of its forty-two largest towns to vote on whether to pay for them, and forty-one voted affirmatively); for the first concerted effort to help orphaned street children (the New York City–based Children’s Aid Society, founded by Yale-educated Connecticut Congregationalist Charles Loring Brace); the first laws regulating child labor and adoption (both in Massachusetts); and the first organizations devoted to preventing child abuse (the Massachusetts and New York City Societies for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children). The primary organization devoted to ending child labor, the National Child Labor Committee, was a union of New Netherland–and Appalachian Arkansas–based movements that fought to secure state laws against the practice; the effort met success in the Northern bloc but was resisted in the southern nations, which eventually had reform forced upon them via the federal government.9 The struggle for women’s suffrage
[(kindle location 4355)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4355)

> coerced. Much of the Yankee elite turned to Unitarianism, an offshoot of the New England church that embraced scientific inquiry and the pursuit of social justice. Under Unitarian president Charles Eliot,
[(kindle location 4389)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4389)

> The movement reached its high-water mark at the infamous 1925 Scopes Trial, where Tennessee officials prosecuted a high school biology teacher for teaching evolution. The Tennessee Supreme Court found him guilty, but critical national media attention undermined fundamentalism’s respectability.14 Thereafter, the Public Protestant majorities in Yankeedom, New Netherland, and the Midlands assumed the fire-and-brimstone crowd was ruined, their irrational beliefs exposed as superstition, their authoritarian tactics as violations of American values. But the fundamentalists spent the thirties and forties organizing themselves, building Bible fellowships, Christian colleges, and a network of gospel radio stations. Unnoticed by North America’s opinion elite, their numbers grew through the 1950s, while membership in mainline Protestant churches declined. Secularism was in retreat as well, its champions fighting only to keep the state, not the people, free from religion. Behind the veneer of a prosperous and content postwar United States, a full-scale cultural war was quietly brewing. In the 1960s it would finally explode.
[(kindle location 4421)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4421)

## CHAPTER 25:  Culture Clash
> After simmering for the better part of a century, North America’s cultural Cold War broke into open conflict in the late 1950s and the 1960s. Each coalition underwent an internal civil war in this period: in the Dixie bloc, African Americans rose up against segregation and the caste system, while the four nations of the Northern alliance faced a youth-led cultural uprising. Both of these destabilizing events started as homegrown phenomena led by disaffected people from within each bloc but soon drew intervention from outside their respective regions. In the first uprising—the civil rights movement—the northern nations’ assistance proved decisive, as it marshaled federal power and troops to force whites in Tidewater, Appalachia, and especially the Deep South to dismantle their cherished racial caste system. In the second “uprising”—the sixties cultural revolution—Dixie-based political leaders intervened in the Northern alliance–based cultural shift by opposing the young revolutionaries from the Left Coast, New Netherland, and Yankeedom, whose agenda was diametrically opposed to everything the Deep South and Tidewater stood for. Weakened by revolution at home, Dixie bloc leaders were unable to stop the youth movement in the short term, but they have since spearheaded efforts to roll back much of what the rebellion accomplished. The interbloc resentments stemming from these twin uprisings widened the divide between the nations, poisoning efforts to find common ground and mutually acceptable solutions in early twenty-first-century America.
[(kindle location 4430)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4430)

## CHAPTER 26:  War, Empire, and the Military
> As on cultural issues, the two “superpower” national blocs have traditionally disagreed on the United States’ proper role in the world, how it should behave toward other states and federations, and whether internal dissent should be tolerated when “national” honor or security is at stake. Once again, opinion has split along ethnonational grounds, with the three nations of the Dixie bloc steadfastly supporting virtually every war since the 1830s, regardless of its purpose and opponents, while championing the use of force to expand and maintain the United States’ power and suppressing dissenting opinions. Opposition to foreign wars—to the extent it has existed—has been concentrated in the four nations of the Northern alliance, although Appalachia is often skeptical of distant imperial undertakings, at least until the fighting starts. As on other issues, the Far West and El Norte are swing nations on foreign policy.
[(kindle location 4620)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4620)

## CHAPTER 27:  The Struggle for Power I: The Blue Nations
> The nations have been struggling with one another for advantage and influence since they were founded, and from 1790 the biggest prize has been control of federal government institutions: Congress, the White House, the courts, and the military. As the central government has grown in size, scope, and power, so have the nations’ efforts to capture and reshape it—and the rest of the continent—in their image. Since 1877 the driving force of American politics hasn’t primarily been a class struggle or tension between agrarian and commercial interests, or even between competing partisan ideologies, although each has played a role. Ultimately the determinative political struggle has been a clash between shifting coalitions of ethnoregional nations, one invariably headed by the Deep South, the other by Yankeedom. Since the end of Reconstruction no one nation has had any hope of dominating the others independently. Instead, each has sought to form alliances with like-minded partners.
[(kindle location 4792)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4792)

Note: the main idea

Between 1877 and 1897 these two nations dominated the federal government with the tacit assistance of their Civil War allies in the Midlands and their colonial minions in the Far West. Together their congressional representatives pushed through policies designed to enrich and empower their societies while weakening their archenemies in the Deep South and Tidewater. First they built a wall of tariffs around the federation, protecting their manufacturing sectors from European competition. The tariffs collected at U.S. Customs Houses accounted for nearly 60 percent of all federal revenue by 1890—far more money, in fact, than the federal government actually needed. Much of this surplus was then pumped back to the citizens of Yankeedom, the Midlands, and the Far West in the form of generous new Civil War pensions, payable in arrears to veterans, their widows, or their children. In the early 1890s these pension payments accounted for more than 37 percent of all federal expenditures, almost double the military budget at the time. Since only Union soldiers qualified for pensions, nearly all of this wealth poured into the northern nations, including the Left Coast and the Far West, which were home to many Union veterans. At the same time, Yankees made a lastditch attempt to thwart the resurgence of the Deep Southern and Tidewater oligarchs by protecting black and poor white voters.
[(kindle location 4807)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4807)

> The divisive 2010 House vote on President Obama’s health care overhaul bill illustrates Northern alliance cohesion. Yankee representatives backed the bill 62 to 21, New Netherlanders by 24 to 6, and the Left Coast by a staggering 21 to 2. The results were the same on a vote a few months later to strengthen the financial regulatory system in the aftermath of the near-meltdown of the world banking system. Yankeedom approved the measures by 63 to 19, the Left Coast by 21 to 1, and New Netherland, 26 to 4, despite being the federation’s financial capital. Both measures were overwhelmingly opposed by the Dixie-bloc delegation as unwarranted intrusions into the private marketplace.11 Even when Congress does vote along strict party lines, Republican defectors are nearly always from the Northern alliance or the Midlands. In 1999 only four Republican House representatives refused to impeach Bill Clinton for lying about an extramarital affair: two Yankees and two Midlanders, one of them a transplant from Massachusetts. Only three Republicans broke ranks to pass Obama’s 2010 financial reform overhaul, all of them from New England.12 In short, by the early twenty-first century, Northern alliance Democrats and Republicans had far more in common with one another than with their counterparts in the Dixie bloc. Indeed, the southern coalition stood against nearly everything the northerners held dear.
[(kindle location 4901)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4901)

Note: very long section on voting patterns of congress people

## CHAPTER 28:  The Struggle for Power II: The Red and the Purple
> Contrary to popular opinion, the Dixie bloc has not been a particularly stable coalition. The dominant parties—the Deep South and Greater Appalachia—have been archenemies for much of their history, having taken up arms against one another in both the American Revolution and the Civil War. The junior partner, Tidewater, was always less committed to apartheid and authoritarianism than its southern neighbor and today is increasingly falling under the influence of the Midlands. The Deep Southern oligarchy, whose economic interests the bloc ultimately serves, has had to contend with the enfranchisement of millions of black voters in its own region, a tendency toward gentlemanly moderation among the Tidewater elite, and the powerful populist sentiment of many Borderlanders. All of these forces threaten to undermine the Dixie coalition. The goal of the Deep Southern oligarchy has been consistent for over four centuries: to control and maintain a one-party state with a colonialstyle economy based on large-scale agriculture and the extraction of primary resources by a compliant, poorly educated, low-wage workforce with as few labor, workplace safety, health care, and environmental regulations as possible.
[(kindle location 4912)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4912)

> When these systems were challenged by African Americans and the federal government, they rallied poor whites in their nation, in Tidewater, and in Appalachia to their cause through fearmongering: The races would mix. Daughters would be defiled. Yankees would take away their guns and Bibles and convert their children to secular humanism, environmentalism, communism, and homosexuality. Their political hirelings discussed criminalizing abortion, protecting the flag from flag burners, stopping illegal immigration, and scaling back government spending when on the campaign trail; once in office, they focused on cutting taxes for the wealthy, funneling massive subsidies to the oligarchs’ agribusinesses and oil companies, eliminating labor and environmental regulations, creating “guest worker” programs to secure cheap farm labor from the developing world, and poaching manufacturing jobs from higher-wage unionized industries in Yankeedom, New Netherland, or the Midlands. It’s a strategy financial analyst Stephen Cummings has likened to “a high-technology version of the plantation economy of the Old South,” with the working and middle classes playing the role of sharecroppers.1 For the oligarchs the greatest
[(kindle location 4924)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4924)

Note: too bad he doesn't Gove us a good look at how this happened.

(“It is hard to say who they hate the most,” Tennessee governor William Brownlow said of his fellow Appalachian Unionists in 1865, “the rebels or the Negroes.”)3
[(kindle location 4945)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=4945)

## Epilogue
> If the power struggles among the nations have profoundly shaped North America’s history over the past four centuries, what might they hold for us in the future? Will the political map of the continent in the year 2100 look the same as it did in 1900 or 2000? Will it still be divided into three enormous political federations, or will it have morphed into something else: a Balkanized collection of nation-states along the lines of twentieth-century Europe; a loose E.U.-style confederation of sovereign nation-states stretching from Monterrey, Mexico, to the Canadian Arctic; a unitary state run according to biblical law as interpreted by the spiritual heirs of Jerry Falwell; a postmodernist utopian network of semisovereign, self-sustaining agricultural villages freed by technological innovations from the need to maintain larger governments at all? No one, if he or she is being both thoughtful and honest, has any idea. What can be said is this: given the challenges facing the United States, Mexico, and, to a lesser extent, Canada, to assume that the continent’s political boundaries will remain as they were in 2010 seems as farfetched as any of these other scenarios.
[(kindle location 5115)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=5115)

## notable notes...

> Oscar and Mary F. Handlin, “Origins of the Southern Labor System,” William and Mary Quarterly, April 1950, p. 202; Bernard Bailyn, Voyagers to the West: A Passage in the Peopling of America on the Eve of the Revolution, New York: Knopf, 1986, pp. 345–348; David Hackett Fischer, Albion’s Seed: Four British Folkways in America, New York: Oxford University Press, 1989, pp. 401–402.
[(kindle location 5420)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=5420)

> Greene (1988), p. 84; Handlin & Handlin, pp. 202–204; James H. Brewer, “Negro Property Owners in Seventeenth-Century Virginia,” William and Mary Quarterly , October 1955, pp. 576, 578.
[(kindle location 5423)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=5423)

> George D. Wolf, The Fair Play Settlers of the West Branch Valley, 1769–1784, Harrisburg, PA: BiblioBazaar, 1969, pp. 27–28, 46–48, 88.
[(kindle location 5616)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=5616)

> Linda Colley, Britons: Forging the Nation, 1707–1737, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1994, p. 167; Fischer (1989), pp. 823–824.
[(kindle location 5620)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=5620)

> Calhoon (1973), pp. 356–358; Piers Mackesy, “British Strategy in the War of American Independence,” in David L. Jacobson, ed., Essays on the American
[(kindle location 5670)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=5670)

> “Historians and the Problem of Early American Democracy” in Jacobson (1970),
[(kindle location 5714)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=5714)

> Swierenga, pp. 89–90, 93; Faust, Vol. 1, pp. 447–448, 461; Richard Sisson et al., eds., The American Midwest: An Interpretive Encyclopedia, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2007, p. 741.
[(kindle location 5813)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=5813)

> Faust, Vol. 1, pp. 90–104; John A. Hawgood, The Tragedy of German America, New York: G. P. Putnam & Sons, 1950, p. 219.
[(kindle location 5815)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=5815)

> Thomas D. Hamm, The Quakers in America, New York: Columbia University Press, 2003, pp. 38–39, 50.
[(kindle location 5816)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=5816)

> Krista O’Donnell et al., The Heimat Abroad: The Boundaries of Germanness, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2005, pp. 144–145; Hawgood (1950), p. 41.
[(kindle location 5820)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=5820)

> “The Message, the Constitution, and the Times” DeBow’s Review, Vol. 30, Issue 2, February 1861, pp. 162, 164; “What Secession Means,” Liberator, 11 July 1862, p. 1.
[(kindle location 5870)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=5870)

> A Nation of Counterfeiters: Capitalists, Con Men, and the Making of the United States by Stephen Mihm
You have 18 highlighted passages
You have 0 notes
Last annotated on March 28, 2014
Many merchants and financial writers referred to counterfeiters as “bankers” or “capitalists,” a tacit acknowledgment that these criminals conducted their affairs with a comparable level of sophistication.
[(kindle location 219)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=219)

> “So systematic, indeed, has this nefarious traffic become of late,” complained the editors of the National Police Gazette in 1849, “that the great dealers execute orders for the town and country with the same method and regularity, as manufacturers in fair branches of trade.”14
[(kindle location 222)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=222)

> As Hezekiah Niles observed, if “the Daemon of Avarice [was] the author of modern banking,” so too was “banking the fountain of counterfeiting.”
[(kindle location 257)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=257)

> “ ‘Make money, honestly, if you can, but at all events, make money,’ seems to be the rule of the present day; for there is scarcely a section of the country to which we turn where we will not see some people industriously making money.”17
[(kindle location 259)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=259)

> Those questions boiled down to a simple choice. Should the nation control the currency, or should the right to print and mint money belong to the very capitalists who wanted it most? Those questions originated in the eighteenth century,
[(kindle location 284)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=284)

> At times, the country seemed less a coherent whole than a collection of self-interested strivers united only in their restless ambition, their hatred of monopoly, and their love of lucre.
[(kindle location 288)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=288)

> Like the promises to pay that adorned bank notes, there was little substance to the nation’s claims of sovereignty over the individual states.
[(kindle location 290)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=290)

> Whether the issue was the War of 1812, tariffs on manufactured goods, or most important, the looming question of slavery, the nation was beset from threats to its continued existence from within and without, and the idea of a permanent, enduring union existed more on paper than in practice. This was especially true when it came to monetary matters, over which the federal government exercised next to no control for much of this period.
[(kindle location 293)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=293)

> Burroughs thus came to symbolize not only the conflation of capitalism and counterfeiting, but also the limits of American economic and political authority.
[(kindle location 383)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=383)

> In the absence of sufficient specie, the need for a circulating medium remained. Book credits and barter could only go so far in facilitating economic exchange. Particularly in the growing seaport cities, merchants needed something a bit more fungible than a cow, a bolt of cloth, or a peck of grain when they paid for goods or settled debts. Colonial governments consequently sanctioned a host of commodity monies beginning in the early seventeenth century. Tobacco, iron nails, and animal pelts all served as crude currencies, with a legislative fiat setting up equivalence between the commodity and a specified number of shillings or pennies. Though such makeshift monies circulated, they proved an unreliable store or measure of value, because their prices fluctuated far more than precious metals did. Wampum, strings of clam shell beads that could be traded with the Indians for pelts, proved a better substitute for specie. First adopted by the Dutch and then by the English, wampum nonetheless fell victim to overproduction, counterfeiting, and the growing scarcity of beaver. One by one, the colonies revoked its legal tender status by the end of the seventeenth century.9
[(kindle location 404)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=404)

> There was in all of this a hint of the magical, or at the very least, magic by other means. In fact, some of the very first proposals for issuing paper currency originated with a coterie of Puritan intellectuals who had a double obsession with money and magic. Samuel Hartlib, a scientist active in the founding of the Royal Society, was the center of this group. He wrote on economic matters and believed that an increase in money would lead to an increase in economic activity. “The more there is of money in any Nation, the quicker also must all those wayes be, wherein money is ordinarily imployed.” Hartlib and the circle of thinkers around him—including George Starkey and John Winthrop Jr. in Massachusetts—pursued extensive studies in alchemy in the hopes of increasing the stock of money. While eventually frustrated in their ambitions, these men eventually settled on paper money as a roundabout means of achieving the alchemical effect. A 1652 pamphlet on bank currency authored by a member of the Hartlib circle made the connection explicit, likening such money to “the Elixir or Philosopher’s Stone.”12
[(kindle location 438)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=438)

> Paul Dudley accused the proponents of paper money of creating value out of thin air. “If this be not the Philosopher’s Stone,” he charged, “there is no such thing in the world.” The twinning of magic and money achieved an even more enduring and infamous association the following year, when the new re-gent of France, Philippe d’Orléans, faced with a dire financial crisis, summoned a number of alchemists to his court in the hopes they could manufacture artificial gold. According to legend, he dismissed them upon the arrival of a Scottish gambler named John Law, who proposed a more modern solution to his woes: the creation of a bank that would issue paper money backed by lands owned by the state. Law superintended the creation of two note-issuing institutions whose paper promises were ultimately backed by the promised discovery of gold in America’s Mississippi River Valley. Eventually, confidence in Law and his creations collapsed and the currency ceased to circulate.13
[(kindle location 448)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=448)

> For every critic like Paul Dudley, there was someone like John Wise, who wrote in support of a “land bank” the year after Law’s scheme collapsed.
[(kindle location 457)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=457)

> “Those who are Lovers of Trade, and delight to see Manufactures encouraged, will be for having a large Addition to our Currency,” Franklin wrote. “For they very well know, that People will have little Heart to advance Money in Trade, when what they can get is scarce sufficient to purchase Necessaries.” Like
[(kindle location 465)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=465)

> as Franklin explained to Parliament in 1767, much of the colonies’ ill will was a response to “the prohibition of making paper money among themselves.”17 Even if the imperial authorities had succeeded in throttling the colonies’ impulse to “make money,” enterprising criminals would have supplied a circulating medium. Initially, counterfeiters restricted themselves to imitating the various Spanish and English coins in circulation,
[(kindle location 494)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=494)

> If Burroughs and Lysander failed in their attempts to increase the quantity of cash, so did Daniel Shays, the Massachusetts farmer who led an insurrection to bring some relief to the specie-starved farmers. The revolt failed, but focused attention on political reform, particularly among the economic and social elite who met in 1787 to discuss changes to the Articles of Confederation. After considerable debate, they jettisoned the Articles altogether and instead drafted a blueprint for a much stronger central government: the Constitution. That document, which was debated and sent to the colonies for ratification just before Burroughs emerged from prison in 1788, reflected the hard-money bias of the individuals who framed it. It granted to Congress the power to regulate interstate and foreign commerce, mint coin, and regulate the money supply. Significantly, it was forbidden for individual states to “emit Bills of Credit [or] make anything but Gold or Silver Coin a Tender in Payment of Debts.” This was another way of saying, however ambiguously, that paper money should not have a place in the nation’s circulating medium.29
[(kindle location 599)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=599)

> securities. “She always had an itch for speculation,” Burroughs was made to say. “It is owing to her that I am now a ruined man. I told her this banking was a ‘hazardous business.’ ”44
[(kindle location 743)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=743)

> betrayed. “I am one of those who promised gold, not paper,” he cried from the floor of Congress. “I promised the currency of the constitution, not the currency of corporations. I did not join in putting down the Bank of the United States, to put up a wilderness of local banks.”
[(kindle location 2159)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0052RDIZA&location=2159)