# The Revolt Against the Masses: How Liberalism Has Undermined the Middle Class

This book was a pleasure to read because he's tracing the origins of the snobbery of the American left/liberal/progressive subculture. Siegel's basic point: American Left/liberal/progressives (ALLPs -- my abbreviation, not his) believe the American people are stupid and -- worse -- tacky. Therefore, the ALLPs have a choice between two missions: change the American people, or somehow get them out of politics.

Of course, the American people have already been squeezed out of politics: real politics are practiced between lobbyists and legislators. The ALLPs are angry that crass profit-seeking business people are the ones who did it instead of themselves.

As I read the book, I kept hearing Rick Perlstein's voice in my head explaining how Siegel is being radically selective or simply making up half the book. But his depiction of liberal intellectual culture rang very true to me based on my own experiences.

Part of what he does in this book is to pick apart the differences between the traditions of socialism, progressivism, and the new (as in from the late 1800's) American liberalism. He kind of argues that the new liberalism is actually old Tory Radicalism, and when he explained who Tory Radicals were, I said, "YES EXACTLY." They were the people who were fighting to pass laws to save foxes while they were throwing hundreds of thousands of people of their land.

OK here are my highlights and notes.

As it turns out, H.G. Wells is the key to understanding the new liberalism. Who woulda thunk.

Did you know Wells wrote a giant history of the world that was a global best seller for decades? And a book called the Future of America. He hung out with Teddy Roosevelt. He supported eugenics, and, like a lot of liberals back then, foreshadowed a bunch of ideas that would later be picked up by fascists and then banished officially from everyones minds after Hitler.

Wells saw America as the future of the human race. America like no other country was able to unlock humanity's potential because we were unfettered by a backward aristocracy:

> “My hero in the confused drama of human life is intelligence; intelligence inspired by constructive passion,” Wells wrote in The Future in America. “There is a demigod imprisoned in mankind.” HG Well Future of America.

But a much bigger figure in Siegel's book is Herbert Croly, who he says is one of the big guys behind the development of pre-WWII authoritarian liberalism. And...I'm afraid that Croly makes a big appearance in an important Obama speech that Robert Reich gets down on his knees and worships at the end of his latest book __[[Beyond Outrage]]__.

> If liberals have a hard time understanding their own history, it’s at least in part because they’ve so successfully avoided dealing with Herbert Croly—who he was and what he hoped to achieve. Croly’s moralistic streak led his detractors to describe him as “Crolier than thou,” but his was an unconventional kind of morality. He was born in 1869 to David Croly and Jane Cunningham Croly, both successful New York journalists. David Croly, a sexual reformer who believed that copulatory repression bred social disorder, was a founding member of the Church of Humanity, an institution dedicated to propagating the ideas of the French sociologist Auguste Comte. David Croly’s wife, known professionally as “Jennie June,” was a caustic critic of marriage and a leading feminist writer. Their son was among the first in America to be baptized into the Comtian faith. Comte, a utopian socialist of sorts, attributed the troubles of the modern world to the “spiritual disorganization of society.” He wanted to deploy positivist science to restore the unity lost in the Protestant Reformation, and thus create a modern version of the “moral communism of medieval Christendom.”
<<p. 11>>

> Croly had little use for Hamilton’s ideal of a commercial republic and even less for Jefferson’s yeoman individualists; they were the bêtes noires of his philosophy. “To achieve a better future,” he argued, Americans had to be “emancipate[d] from their past.” He rejected American tradition, with its faith in the Constitution and its politics of parties and courts, and argued for rebuilding America’s foundation on higher spiritual and political principles that would transcend traditional ideas of democracy and self-government. Like Wells, Croly called for centralized power that might be, he acknowledged, “injurious to certain aspects of traditional American democracy.” *But this was no great loss, because “the average American individual is morally and intellectually inadequate to serious and consistent conceptions of his responsibilities as a democrat.”* The “erroneous and misleading” democratic tradition, he concluded, “must yield before the march of a constructive national democracy” remodeled along French lines.

> Croly had studied in Paris and had “an addiction to French political philosophy,” in the words of his friend, the literary critic Edmund Wilson. Croly, said Wilson, “considered his culture mainly French.” Croly’s aim was to restructure the Republic on a Francophile footing. His argument in The Promise of American Life and its successor, Progressive Democracy (1915), two books so tightly connected that Croly said he wished he had written them as one, is best described as a plan for achieving (Auguste) Comtian ends—that is, the worship of society—by Rousseauian means, i.e., a plebiscitary democracy led by enlightened experts. As Croly himself explained it, he was “applying ideas, long familiar to foreign political thinkers, to the subject matter of American life.”
<<pp. 10-11>>

Croly's major book was __The Promise of American Life__.

> The book sold poorly but propelled him onto the national stage, where he drew the interest of former president Theodore Roosevelt. Croly would influence TR, just as TR, whom Croly saw as an American Bismarck, had already influenced him.

> Bismarck was much on Croly’s mind. In The Promise, Croly, like John Stuart Mill, showed nothing but contempt for English liberalism. He saw it leading to “economic individualism . . . faith in compromise . . . [and a] dread of ideas.” These had, he wrote, made “the English system a hopelessly confused bundle of semi-efficiency and semi-inefficiency.” Croly much preferred the greater efficiency and, as he saw it, the greater equality of Germany, where “little by little the fertile seed of Bismarck’s Prussian patriotism grew into a semi-democratic nationalism.” Its great virtue was organization: “In every direction, German activity was organized and placed under skilled professional leadership, while…each of these special lines of work was subordinated to its particular place in a comprehensive scheme of national economy. … The German national organization means increased security, happiness and opportunity of development for the whole German people.”

> Liberals came to accept as a given Croly’s insistence that, in America, the German path could be achieved only by using higher education to create the “skilled professional leadership” necessary to run society. Entrusting public affairs to this educated class would, Croly believed, have “a leavening effect on human nature.” “Democracy must stand or fall on a platform of possible human perfectibility,” he said. These were the words of a radical, not a reformer—a man who, like Marx and Comte, saw himself as leading humanity to a higher and more refined stage of civilization. 

Human perfectibility! The conservatives I am talking to these days have pointed out that a fundamental principle of their movement is that humans and humanity can not be perfected, whereas the left has traditionally believed in that project. Those who believe in human perfectibility can believe themselves to be perfected, which leads to the kind of elitism that Siegel is writing this book against.   

> For Croly, businessmen and their allies—the jack-of-all-trades latter-day Jeffersonians—were blocking the path to the bright future he envisioned for the specialists of the rising professional classes. America’s business culture, he warned, threatened individuality, because businessmen “have a way of becoming fundamentally very much alike,” despite their differences. “Their individualities are forced into a common mold because the ultimate measure of the value of their work is the same, and is nothing but its results in cash. … In so far as the economic motive prevails, individuality is not developed; it is stifled.”

> The flip side of Croly’s hostility to self-interested businessmen was his adoration of the new class of American intellectuals and artists. This class had the virtue, he said, of having a “disinterested” take on public affairs, which allowed it to rise above the petty peculiarities of the marketplace and serve all of humanity, in the manner of Plato’s guardians. Unfortunately, “the popular interest in Higher Education has not served to make Americans attach much importance to the advice of the highly educated man,” Croly lamented. “He is less of a practical power in the U.S. than he is in any European country.” Like H.G. Wells in England, Mussolini in Italy, and Lenin in Russia, Croly wanted the collective power of society put “at the service of its ablest members,” who would take the lead roles in the drama of social re-creation. 

> Croly’s Progressive-era audience was stirred by his insistence that the “ablest” deserved a more interesting world. “The opportunities, which during the past few years the reformers have enjoyed to make their personal lives more interesting, would be nothing compared to the opportunities for all sorts of stirring and responsible work, which would be demanded of individuals under the proposed plan for political and economic reorganization,” he wrote in The Promise.
<<pp. 12-13>>

> Croly concludes The Promise with the insistence that “the common citizen can become something of a saint and something of a hero, not by growing to heroic portions in his own person, but by the sincere and enthusiastic imitation of heroes and saints.” This will depend, he argued in the book’s final sentence, on “the ability of his exceptional fellow-countrymen to offer him acceptable examples of heroism and saintliness.” Croly’s critique of industrial-era inequality had by its conclusion become a call for, in his own words, the “creation of a political, economic, and social aristocracy.”

Full Croly quote: "The essential wholeness of the community depends absolutely on the ceasless creation of a political, economic and social aristocracy and their equally incessant replacement." Promise of American Life Pg 240

> Bourne wanted to enlist “a vast army of young men and women who felt a fluttering in their souls that call them to some great impersonal adventure.” He envisioned a modernized version of the Catholic priest, “a new type of teacher-engineer-community worker,” who could aestheticize society and redeem slovenly America. “I begin to wonder whether there aren’t advantages in having administration of the State taken care of by a scientific body of men with a social sense, or perhaps an aesthetic-scientific idea of a desirable urban life,” he wrote. “There really may be something in the German claim that this liberates energies for real freedom of thought.” His other cat’s-paw was what he saw [Kindle location 469](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=469)

> “Trans-National America”—in effect, to practice multiculturalism avant la lettre in order to free the country from the shackles of puritanical Protestant culture. In its place, he hoped for a “beloved community” in which the young would replace bourgeois individualism with an organic culture that encouraged people to flourish as individuals and yet absorbed them into a loving whole. Bourne would be read on some of the communes of the 1960s as the prophet of their founding. Randolph Bourne, the pioneer of generational politics and an aestheticized society, was born in 1866 to a genteel middle-class Presbyterian family of Bloomfield, New Jersey, descended from Protestant ministers and lawyers. He entered the world in literally the worst manner [Kindle location 476](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=476)

> America, a land of “appalling slovenliness” and “ignorance.” The urban masses, as Bourne saw them, were “without taste, without standards but those of the mob.” The recent immigrants, once exposed to their new country’s commercial culture, became, Bourne argued, “the flotsam and jetsam of American life, the downward undertow of our civilization with its leering cheapness and falseness of taste and spiritual outlook, the absence of mind and sincere feeling we see in our slovenly towns, our vapid moving pictures, our popular novels, and in the vacuous faces of [Kindle location 493](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=493)

> premier social critic of the first half of the twentieth century,” was coming to fame as a bitter German-American critic of “Mr. Wilson’s War.” At the height of his influence in the 1920s, Mencken’s reputation fattened on the inanities of Prohibition, blue-nosed book-banning, and the Ku Klux Klan, all of which he saw as works of the “boobus Americanus.” His broadsides against Prohibition, posturing preachers, and anti-evolutionists made him a hero to generations of liberals and college students. But his true quarry was American democracy and the American people, whom he defined as a “rabble of ignorant peasants.” Henry Louis Mencken, born in 1880 to a moderately successful German-American cigar manufacturer, adopted his father’s prejudices. Father and son disdained do-gooders, socialists, and Democrats. Terry Teachout, in his book on Mencken, The Skeptic, quotes Mencken’s description of his father: “All mankind, in his sight, was divided into two great races: those who paid their bills, and those who didn’t. The former were virtuous, despite any evidence that could be adduced to the contrary; the latter were unanimously and incurably scoundrels.” [Kindle location 615](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=615)

> Irishman and Mencken the displaced Deutschlander shared an abiding hatred of Anglo-American culture. And like the Napoleonists (the British radical Whigs who hoped for a Napoleonic victory that could clear out the detritus of the English aristocracy), Mencken and Shaw strongly admired powerful rulers who could defeat democracy in the name of a more orderly and culturally hierarchical set of social arrangements. The [Kindle location 636](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=636)

> “The Wilson who agreed to the Allied intervention [against the Soviets] in the summer of 1918” and the Wilson who “one year later at the Paris Peace Conference” helped save the Soviet Union by insisting that the Germans relinquish their conquests on the Eastern Front “almost seemed like two different people.” [Kindle location 842](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=842)

Wilson saving USSR 

> “we are running a race with Bolshevism and the world is on fire.” “From the eastern border of France all the way through Asia to the Sea of Japan,” notes historian Anthony Read, “not a single pre-war government remained in power.” From Berlin to Seattle, strikes and in some cases pro-Bolshevik revolutionary movements seemed like the wave of the future. Comintern chief Zinoviev confidently predicted, “In a year’s time, the whole of Europe will be Communist.” The leaders looking to remake the world at Versailles were confounded by Bolshevism; they didn’t know exactly what it was, much less how to contain it. The leaders gathered at Versailles, notes Read, saw themselves as men dancing on a live volcano that had destroyed the old Europe and was threatening continued eruptions. Harry Kessler, an Anglo-German count and a Soviet sympathizer, captured the scene: “The wave of Bolshevism surging in from the East resembles somewhat the invasion by Islam in the seventh century,” he wrote. “Fanaticism and power in the service of a nebulous fresh hope are faced, far and wide, by nothing more than the fragments of old ideologies. The banner of the prophets waves at the head of Lenin’s armies too.” [Kindle location 845](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=845)

> Faced with the Soviet challenge, Wilson, who came bearing the new ideology of universal democracy, floated the idea that the Bolsheviks should be invited to the Paris Peace Conference. Churchill, who saw in Communism something akin to “legalized sodomy,” blocked the suggestion. Wilson the Progressive took a different tact: “War won’t defeat Bolshevism, food will,” he said. Capitalism had to reform itself, he argued, to stave off Bolshevik barbarism. Wilson’s efforts to reconstruct [Kindle location 854](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=854)

Great quotes about how it felt like Bolsheviks were taking over world.

> In 1919, the Supreme Court upheld Abrams’s conviction. But in his dissent, Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes laid the basis for the modern First Amendment. Holmes found that “speech that produces or is intended to produce a clear and imminent danger” can be prosecuted. But he saw no such “imminent” danger in Abrams’s leaflets, which he described as “silly” writings by an “unknown man.” More important was Holmes’s underlying reasoning. Like the British philosopher John Stuart Mill, Holmes determined that a maximum of free speech was essential for a successful society. America, he reasoned, had an interest in discovering truth available only through “the marketplace of ideas,” where proponents of competing viewpoints must strive to make their best case. [Kindle location 908](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=908)

How we got free speech: backlash to WWI restrictions.

> liberal: “We crushed German militarism only to find that we ourselves had adopted many of its worst features.” [Kindle location 935](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=935)

> WWI: “all Gods dead, all wars fought, all faith in man shaken.” President [Kindle location 938](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=938)

> Wilson in particular was accused by one former Progressive as having “produced more cynics than any other figure in modern history.” Stearns, soon to exile himself to France, wrote bitterly about the post-war U.S. in his seminal 1919 book, Liberalism in America: “In Soviet countries there is in fact no freedom of the press and no pretense that there is. In America today there is in fact no freedom of the press and we only make the matter worse by pretending that there is.” [Kindle location 939](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=939)

> America “seemed to want to hurt people,” he said. “It showed no concern for innocence. . . . It was not my America, it was something else.” [Kindle location 944](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=944)

> book edited by Stearns, Civilization in the United States: An Inquiry by Thirty Americans, might better have been titled “Why There Is No Civilization in America.” The theme repeated by the various authors was that people just do things better in Europe. Stearns, the man who had done the most to explain why liberalism was different from the Progressivism that had preceded it, conceived of the book’s essays as a collective denunciation of a supposedly Puritan America. “Life in this country,” explained one of the contributors, “is joyless and colorless, universally standardized, tawdry, uncreative, given over to the worship of wealth and machinery.” America’s material success, one essayist noted, was a reflection of its spiritual failure. The wife of the American man, another contributor explained, quoting George Cabot Lodge, “finds him so sexually inapt that she refuses to bear his children.” Before his death in 1918, Randolph Bourne, always a lodestar to Stearns and other young liberals, had noted: “The modern radical opposes the present social system not because it does not give him ‘rights’ but because it warps and stunts the potentialities of society and of human nature.” [Kindle location 951](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=951)

Bourne's whole book was devoted to how Europe is better. 

> The contributors to Civilization in the United States, many of them Harvard men, were driven by resentment. The so-called lost generation, explained Malcolm Cowley, was “extremely class conscious.” Like Bourne, they had “a vague belief in aristocracy and in the possibility of producing real aristocrats through education,” Cowley said. They went to Europe “to free themselves from organized stupidity, to win their deserved place in the hierarchy of intellect.” They felt that their status in America’s business culture was grossly inadequate, given their obviously exceptional intelligence and extraordinary talent. Their simmering anger at what they saw as the mediocrity of democratic life led them to pioneer the now commonplace stance of blaming society for their personal failings. Animated by patrician spirit, they found the leveling egalitarianism of the United States an insult to their sense of self-importance. [Kindle location 960](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=960)

>  Mencken branded the mass of Americans who had backed “Wilson’s War” as “boobs” and “peasants.” They were nothing more than a “timorous, sniveling, poltroonish, ignominious mob.” Mencken, a great admirer of the Kaiser, characterized American democracy as “the worship of jackals by jackasses.” [Kindle location 970](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=970)

> pluralism. “The root of liberalism,” as opposed to the Progressivism that preceded it, wrote Stearns, “is hatred of compulsion, for the liberal has respect for the individual and his conscience and reason which the employment of coercion necessarily destroys.” [Kindle location 978](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=978)

> Woodrow Wilson had insisted that mass society, properly led, could produce an “autonomous life in every part yet a common life & purpose.” [Kindle location 987](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=987)

> The “sanctimonious swindle,” as they now described American involvement in WWI, produced a rolling wave of hostility to middle-class society, which they blamed for the bloodshed. In Greenwich Village, Floyd Dell described the fall from the heights of pre-war idealism: “Humanity seems to have climbed painfully up from the primeval slime and reached out its hands toward the stars in vain. Its arts and sciences … have provided it with the full means of self-destruction. . . . There are evidently flaws in our human nature which make our idealism a tragic joke.” America had failed the liberals, and they would never forgive it. [Kindle location 988](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=988)

And what's so tragic about that is that America didn't want to go to war. so it wasn't the failure of the people but of the leaders.

> poems, “How Beastly the Bourgeois Is.” In it, Lawrence compares the middle class, “especially the male of the species,” to “a fungus, living on the remains of a bygone life/sucking his life out of the dead leaves of greater life than his own.” [Kindle location 999](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=999)

> English aesthetes such as John Ruskin and Oscar Wilde, German thinkers such as Adam Muller and Ferdinand Tönnies, who mourned the lost glory of the medieval world, and French litterateurs, most notably Charles Baudelaire and Gustave Flaubert, had made careers of flaying the bourgeoisie. [Kindle location 1001](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1001)

> great French historian of Communism François Furet, the middle class was “petty, ugly, miserly, laborious, stick-in-the-muds, while artists were great, beautiful, brilliant, and bohemian.” Flaubert, for his part, argued that politically, “the only rational thing . . . is a government of Mandarins,” and that “the whole dream of democracy is to raise the proletarian to the level of stupidity attained by the bourgeois.” [Kindle location 1004](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1004)

> Americans pioneered popular culture because big-city entertainments had to appeal to uprooted people who came from a bewildering diversity of cultures ranging from rural America to the peasant backwaters of eastern and southern Europe. In the World War I era, the rise of illustrated newspapers, radio, and movies—media that appealed to the immigrant masses, assumed to be of a low IQ—produced a hard rain of criticism. [Kindle location 1010](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1010)

> But while the Progressives had hoped to redeem America’s virtue, the mass-culture critics of the 1920s hoped to remake America in the image of Europe. [Kindle location 1017](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1017)

> were all “makeshifts of despair,” part of the proof that America was a “joyless” land. Brooks compared the United States to a “primeval monster” that was “relentlessly concentrated in the appetite of the moment” and that knew “nothing of its own vast, inert nerveless body, encrusted with parasites and half-indistinguishable from the slime in which it moves.” In the 1920s, the first [Kindle location 1025](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1025)

> “These writers,” wrote their chronicler Malcolm Cowley, “were united into one crusading army by their revolt” against the American tradition as they understood it. “In the exciting years 1919–1920,” wrote Cowley, “they seized power in the literary world . . . almost like the Bolsheviks in Russia.” [Kindle location 1036](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1036)

> bearer, Wilson hissed: “I should be insincere to make it appear that the deaths of this ‘poor white trash’ of the South and the rest made me feel half so bitter as the mere conscription or enlistment of any of my friends.” The cultural [Kindle location 1041](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1041)

> Arthur Schlesinger wrote. “They fixed the image of America, not just for the intellectuals of his own generation, but for the world in the next half century.” Main Street was Sinclair Lewis’s [Kindle location 1047](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1047)

> writings. His worldview came from reading the arguments of the German Darwinist Ernest Haeckel on evolution, the Hungarian theorist of social degeneration Max Nordau, and the Belgian symbolist playwright Comte Maeterlinck, who won the Nobel Prize in 1911. He was not very interested in politics per se, but, while still at Yale, the twenty-one-year-old [Kindle location 1058](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1058)

> Sinclair’s utopian Community Helicon Hall, in then bucolic Englewood, New Jersey. [Kindle location 1060](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1060)

> Jack London’s Carmel commune. [Kindle location 1063](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1063)

> Carol is tormented by the self-satisfied mediocrity that surrounds her. She dreams of a “better life,” of “a more conscious life,” though she is never able to define it. In his notes for Main Street, Lewis wrote of Carol Kennicott: “Her desire for beauty in prairie towns was but one tiny aspect of a world-wide demand [for] alteration of all our modes of being and doing business.” [Kindle location 1073](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1073)

> Carol and the people she’s drawn to, such as Guy Pollock, a lawyer twenty years her senior, provided a stock of tropes for the next half century’s commentaries about the conformity of American life. “I had decided to leave here,” Guy tells Carol. “Then I found that the Village Virus had me. . . That’s all of the biography of a living dead man.” “The Village Virus,” as Carol explains it to herself, is contentment: “The contentment of the quiet dead, who are scornful of the living for their restless walking. It is negation canonized as the one positive virtue. It is the prohibition of happiness. It is slavery self-sought and self-defended. It is dullness made God.” Americans, Carol says, are “a savorless people, gulping tasteless food, and sitting afterward, coatless and thoughtless, in rocking-chairs prickly with inane decorations, listening to mechanical music, saying mechanical things about the excellence of Ford automobiles, and viewing themselves as the greatest race in the world.” [Kindle location 1076](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1076)

> Zenith. Paving the way for the Frankfurt School and the mass-culture critiques of the 1950s, Lewis writes of Babbitt: “These standard advertised wares—toothpastes, socks, tires, cameras, instantaneous hot-water heaters—were his symbols and proofs of excellence; at first the [Kindle location 1088](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1088)

> page, Babbitt says, “I’ve never done a single thing I want to in my whole life! I don’t know’s I’ve accomplished anything except to just get along.” The book was generally [Kindle location 1092](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1092)

> “Babbitry,” noted Malcolm Cowley, anticipating Herbert Marcuse, became the moniker for “this pecuniary vision of repressive progress.” [Kindle location 1095](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1095)

> Carol Kennicott and George Babbitt, wrote Lippmann, “are driven by they know not what compulsions, they are ungoverned and yet unfree, the sap of life does not reach them, their taproots having been cut.” [Kindle location 1100](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1100)

> superiority. “The old reformer has become the Tired Radical, and his sons and daughters drink at the fountain of [Mencken’s] American Mercury,” noted Socialist Norman Thomas in 1926. “They have no illusions but one. And that is that they can live like Babbitt and think like Mencken.” Here began what David Brooks would later describe as the world of “Bobos,” meaning bourgeois bohemians. [Kindle location 1104](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1104)

"Live like Babbitt but think like Mencken." i.e. the story of stuff

> Gotham’s “streets rise with the poured human waste” that descends into the subways where, when the doors open, “the brackish human flow pours through.” [Kindle location 1115](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1115)

> “In a democracy,” Frank complained, “where castes are vague, where money-power has few manifest badges of dress or standard of living; where indeed millionaire and clerk go to the same movie, read the same books, travel the same roads, and where intellectual distinctions must be carefully concealed,” it is the “herd” that rules. In a similar vein, he wrote of the “secretly controlled affair of baseball” in which Babe Ruth’s home runs are “an effort on the part of the machine to connect with the crowd.” “Babe Ruth,” he concluded “is the demagogue of the game.” A few years later, after side trips into mysticism and Hispanic and Native American cultures, Frank would become an ardent Communist. [Kindle location 1120](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1120)

> But what, DeVoto asked, was Lewis’s point? Lewis was never able to extract an ethic from his negative aesthetics other than to imply that those who recognized the ugliness of American life thereby acquired a higher morality that entitled them to lead. [Kindle location 1128](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1128)

> “It appears,” wrote DeVoto, “that the Village Virus which has poisoned America consists of the failure of small towns to support productions of the one-act plays of Eugene O’Neill, to provide candlelight at dinner, and to sanction lounging pajamas as evening wear for housewives.” [Kindle location 1130](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1130)

> The new ethic, as Malcolm Cowley noted, would be organized around consumption. The heirs of Carol and George embraced a “self-expression” that “encouraged a demand for all kinds of products”—like pajamas or modern furniture or that Greenwich Village innovation, the party—in which a group of friends gathered to dance to the Victrola and drink liquor in the era of Prohibition. “Escape from the mass was becoming a mass movement,” Cowley noted wryly, because with the help of business, “the Villaging of the middle class had spread through the country.” Bohemianism, he mistakenly observed, was “dying of success.” George and Carol had a hard time figuring out what they were for, but by the mid-Twenties, a series of celebrated court cases helped them define what they were against. [Kindle location 1134](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1134)

> But over time—influenced, like many liberals, by the eugenics movement and the rise of Freudian psychiatry—Darrow modified his views. As a modern man who believed in moral progress, he still didn’t see criminals as responsible for their acts. But instead of continuing to emphasize material motivations, he argued by way of Darwin that people are basically animals shaped by their heredity and upbringing, so their choices can be explained scientifically. “Science and evolution,” Darrow wrote, “teach us that man is an animal, a little higher than the other orders of animals; that he is governed by the same natural laws that govern the rest of the universe.” [Kindle location 1166](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1166)

> Speaking of Loeb and his murder of Bobby Franks, Darrow said, “This terrible crime was inherent in his organism, and came from some ancestor.” [Kindle location 1173](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1173)

> Darrow also played the biochemical card. The expert endocrinologists whom he called to testify attributed Leopold and Loeb’s behavior to defective glands. [Kindle location 1176](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1176)

> They killed him because they were made that way. Because somewhere in the infinite processes that go to the making up of a boy or the man something slipped, and these unfortunate lads sit here, hated, despised, outcasts, with the community shouting. [Kindle location 1180](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1180)

> The famed preacher Billy Sunday weighed in on the murder: It could be “traced to the moral miasma that contaminates some of our ‘young intellectuals,’” he said. “It is now considered fashionable for higher education to scoff at God. . . . Precocious brains, salacious books, infidel minds—all these helped to produce this murder.” [Kindle location 1186](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1186)

> As late as 2006 through 2010, the aging liberal activist Edward Asner toured the country with a revival of the 1955 play. In the dramatized version of the case, which took considerable liberties with the historical record, the trial was initiated when Scopes, a high school biology teacher, was dragged out of his classroom by a mob and thrown into jail. In reality, as historian Edward Larson showed in his scrupulous rendering of the case based on primary sources, there was no mob, nor was there a jailing. Evolution had long been part of the Tennessee high school curriculum, and there had been no attempt to enforce the symbolic law—the Butler Act—that barred its teaching. In an era when science was seen as wondrous, this law was meant more as a matter of symbolism than substance. It was a period in which eugenics, which had first been introduced by Darwin’s cousin Francis Galton, won strong support from liberals who supported both family planning and economic planning. Thirty-five states had enacted laws to restrain the ability of the genetically “unfit” to reproduce themselves. The case was a contrivance from the outset. The American Civil Liberties Union, founded in the wake of WWI’s repression, had initiated the case, which it saw as an opportunity to repeal the Butler Act while also making a name for itself. The ACLU ran newspaper ads across the state looking for a teacher who would be willing to cooperate with them in challenging the state law. They needed a defendant who would agree to be tried for violating the Butler Act. The town fathers of Dayton envisioned the trial as a potential boon that could put them on the map, and they convinced Scopes, a local high school teacher, to intentionally incriminate himself so that he would qualify as a defendant and the state’s case could go forward. His arrest was a friendly affair arranged by local boosters as a prelude to the show, which would make history by being the first trial broadcast on radio. [Kindle location 1206](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1206)

There was a big Eugenics backdrop to the scopes trial.

> ...Jeffersonians such as Bryan of “suppressing fruitful social and economic inequalities…in favor of intellectual and moral conformity.” [Kindle location 1225](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1225)

> "morondom.” Mencken, a eugenicist, despised Bryan as a demagogue “animated by the ambition of a common man to get his hand upon the collar of his superiors, or failing that, to get his thumb into their eyes.” He mocked the locals as “Babbits,” “morons,” “peasants,” and “yokels,” which, to be fair, was no less caustic than his usual characterizations of the immigrant masses. [Kindle location 1231](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1231)

This is a good example to explain how there aren't two sides. It's more complicated.

> But Bryan, Mencken’s avatar of dreadful democracy, was far from a bigoted provincial man. A well-read world traveler, Bryan had read On the Origin of Species in 1905 and had engaged in an ongoing debate about the book with eugenicist Henry Fairfield Osborn, the president of the American Museum of Natural History. The Great Commoner treated his talented wife as a partner and decried the sin of religious prejudice. He roundly criticized his supporters who attributed his 1908 defeat at the hands of William Howard Taft to a Catholic conspiracy, and he would later take Henry Ford publicly to task for publishing The Protocols of the Elders of Zion. A Presbyterian who often attended Methodist services, Bryan was not interested in theological disputes. He was an adept of the social gospel and insisted that the only authentic Christianity was “applied Christianity.” Bryan wanted a politics based on “principles which are eternal,” and he found these principles in his three lodestars: the Bible, the Constitution, and Thomas Jefferson. He was never a backwoods Bible thumper, and even though mistaken about human evolution, he was never a biblical literalist. Long before the trial, Bryan saw Darrow’s Darwinism and its central tenet of natural selection as “the merciless law by which the strong crowd out and kill off the weak.” As Bryan understood it, Darwinism was a license for unbridled capitalism. [Kindle location 1241](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1241)

> Science is a magnificent force, but it is not a teacher of morals. It can perfect machinery, but it adds no moral restraints to protect society from the misuse of the machine. It can also build gigantic intellectual ships, but it constructs no moral rudders for the control of storm-tossed human vessel. It not only fails to supply the spiritual element needed but some of its unproven hypotheses rob the ship of its compass and thus endanger its cargo. In war, science has proven itself an evil genius; it has made war more terrible than it ever was before. . . . Science has made war so hellish that civilization was about to commit suicide; and now we are told that newly discovered instruments of destruction will make the cruelties of the late war seem trivial in comparison with the cruelties of wars that may come in the future. If civilization is to be saved from the wreckage threatened by intelligence not consecrated by love, it must be saved by the moral code of the meek and lowly Nazarene. His teachings, and His teachings alone, can solve the problems that vex the heart and perplex the world. [Kindle location 1258](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1258)

Bryant statement at the trial.

> The irony of the Scopes trial, notes historian Michael Kazin, was that it led liberals to tag Bryan, who in many ways was a proto–New Dealer, as a “right-wing authoritarian.” At the same time, it helped position Mencken—the rabidly anti-democratic and sometimes anti-Semitic supporter of eugenics who admired both the Kaiser and 1930s Germany—as “the champion of liberalism.” But this is less of an irony than it appears to Kazin. Modern liberalism, before, during, and since the New Deal, has been based in large measure on Croly’s “exceptional fellow countrymen,” the professionals who feel contempt or pity for the unwashed and who are resentful that many business people are better off than they are. Bryan’s humiliation became a central event in the liberal story of modern America; it linked together the post-WWI persecutions by rednecks, the execution of Saco and Vanzetti, and Sinclair Lewis’s ever-popular It Can’t Happen Here, the 1935 novel in which a Bryan-like leader established a dictatorship in America. It’s a story whose echoes can still be heard during dinner-table conversations in America’s hipper precincts. [Kindle location 1282](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1282)

> Scare of 1919–20. The defense cleverly placed first the Red Scare itself and then the Commonwealth of Massachusetts on trial. That strategy united virtually all liberals, Communists, working-class anarchists, and upper-class reformers in what was the first example of a top-bottom political alliance of the sort that came to characterize post-1960s politics. [Kindle location 1303](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1303)

> The literary critic Granville Hicks drew a related inference. He noted, “It was practically all my neighbors in Northampton [Massachusetts] except for the other members of the college faculty” who thought the verdict justified. “The battle,” Hicks concluded, “was between the intellectuals and everybody else.” But intellectuals soon found powerful new allies and a compelling foreign alternative to the American Dream. [Kindle location 1342](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1342)

Brownies and profs on saco in noho. 

> After three brief pilgrimages to the Soviet Union, Steffens wrote in The Nation of a “new culture, an economic, scientific, not a moral, culture.” The Bolsheviks and not the Americans, Steffens explained, were the true pragmatists; they were conducting a grand experiment by setting “up a dictatorship supported by a small trained minority, to make and maintain for generations a scientific arrangement of economic forces which would result in economic democracy first and political democracy last.” It was in anticipation of one of his trips to the Soviet Union that he famously wrote, “I’ve [Kindle location 1513](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1513)

> But as with Mencken, Shaw’s gifts for ridicule were far more developed than his grasp of politics. “When my friends learned I was going to Russia, they loaded me with tinned food of all sorts,” Shaw wrote. “They thought Russia was starving. But I threw all their food out of the window in Poland before I reached the Soviet frontier.” This in the middle of a vast Soviet-induced famine that killed millions. The wit that had allowed Mencken and Shaw to seem so audacious fell flat in a time of depression and dictatorship. [Kindle location 1643](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1643)

> In 1933, at the age of seventy-five, Shaw visited the USSR with Lady Astor. “The Astors suddenly took it into their heads to see for themselves whether Russia is really the earthly paradise I had declared it to be,” he later wrote. “And they challenged me to go with them.” The wealthy Lady Astor was the first woman in parliament and a devout Christian Scientist. She saw that Stalin and Hitler were “blood brothers and very bloody brothers at that.” Shaw, the master of moral equivalence, countered that “nothing should be said about the concentration camps, because it was we [the British] who invented them during the Boer war.” When Lady Astor complained that there was no freedom of speech in the Soviet Union, Shaw replied that at least the Russians were “free from the illusions of democracy.” [Kindle location 1647](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1647)

> Faced with evidence of Soviet horrors, he quipped, in typical Shavian fashion, “Yes, I have seen all the ‘terrors’ & I was terribly pleased by them.” As someone who had long seen “extermination of lesser beings as a worthwhile evolutionary effort,” Shaw blithely argued that “our question is not to kill or not to kill, but how to select the right people to kill.” He added, “The essential difference between the Russian liquidator with his pistol (or whatever his humane killer may be) and the British hangman is that they do not operate on the same sort of person.” With these awkward stabs at irony, meant to express support for Stalin, not only did Shaw refuse to acknowledge the decencies of his own society, but he also exposed the ugly underside of his “advanced” liberal views. When he returned to the West, Shaw delivered a radio broadcast, delivered over the BBC in England and CBS in America, that had the Menckenesqe title “Look, You Boobs.” In the address, the famous Irishman who had rejected vaccination, vivisection, and the germ theory of disease declared his authority on the realities of the Soviet Union. This was moral foolishness with enormous consequences. [Kindle location 1654](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1654)

> By 1968, the Schlesinger who had once fetishized Jacksonian workingmen and 1930s American nationalists described Americans “as the most frightening people on this planet.” Schlesinger discerned a tension between “the educated few and the uneducated many,” as when he warned that Eugene McCarthy’s 1968 presidential campaign was turning the Democratic Party in to a “semiprecious rally of the illuminati.” But by 1972, he had come to see blue-collar America as composed of “the most emotional and primitive champions of conservatism—who want to crack down on the ‘niggers,’ imprison the long-haired college kids, and bomb the hell out of the North Vietnamese.” By 1972, Schlesinger was supporting George McGovern, the candidate of the New Politics. In the new liberalism that emerged out of the political cauldron of the 1960s, professionals such as lawyers and social workers mobilized to protect victimized groups from a supposedly virulent majority. But too often professionals have a vested interest in inflating their own worth at the expense of those they look to instruct. “Uncertain . . . of the nature of their constituency, many liberals tend to cover their confusion with an intense if generally unfocused moralism,” Nuechterlein wrote in 1977. [Kindle location 2090](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2090)

> Ortega’s extended essay and Huxley’s novel were written at a dark time for democracy. In the course of the 1920s, first Portugal, then Spain, Italy, Greece, Japan, Poland, and Czechoslovakia, followed by Austria, Hungary, Yugoslavia, and a host of Latin American countries had turned to dictatorship. As both The Revolt of the Masses and Brave New World were being composed, Fascism was in the saddle in Italy and the Nazis were threatening to seize power in Germany—yet Ortega and Huxley saw American culture as the greatest threat to the future. Ortega mocked common sense [Kindle location 2135](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2135)

> Ortega’s assertions about the resentful, barely literate mob were built in part on Martin Heidegger’s Being and Time (1927), which decried the inauthentic life led by mass man. Both Heidegger and Ortega wrote in the tradition of imperial Germany, arguing that World War I was in part a struggle to defend the Teutonic soul from the debased modernity of modern machinery and mass production represented by America. [Kindle location 2144](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2144)

> In this beautiful world, alienation was as unknown as bearbaiting and cockfighting, “and those who wanted to amuse themselves were,” in Huxley’s words, “compelled, in their humble way, to be artists.” Both writers considered the egalitarianism of American democracy a degraded form of government that, in Ortega’s words, discouraged “respect or esteem for superior individuals.” Intellectuals, they complained, weren’t given their due by the human detritus of this new world. Huxley, a member of the Eugenics Society, saw mass literacy, mass education, and popular newspapers as having “created an immense class of what I may call the New Stupid.” He proposed that the British government raise the price of newsprint ten or twentyfold because the New Stupid, manipulated by newspaper plutocrats, were imposing a soul-crushing conformity on humanity. The masses, so his argument went, needed to be curtailed for their own good and for the greater good of high culture. [Kindle location 2159](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2159)

> Huxley, writing in a 1927 issue of Harper’s, called for an aristocracy of intellect, and in a slim volume entitled Proper Studies, published the same year, he called for culling the masses through negative eugenics. “The active and intelligent oligarchies of the ideal state do not yet exist,” he told Harper’s readers, “but the Fascist party in Italy, the Communist party in Russia, the Kuomintang in China are still their inadequate precursors.” In the future, he insisted, “political democracy as now practiced will be unknown; our descendants will want a more efficient and rational form of government.” He warned Americans that while they were wedded to “the old-fashioned democratic and humanitarian ideas of the eighteenth century . . . the force of circumstances will be too powerful for them” and they, too, would come to be governed by a new aristocracy of spirituality and intellect. In 1931, as Huxley was composing Brave New World, he wrote newspaper articles arguing that “we must abandon democracy and allow ourselves to be ruled dictatorially by men who will compel us to do and suffer what a rational foresight demands.” It was Huxley’s view that “dictatorship and scientific propaganda may provide the only means of saving humanity from the misery of anarchy.” Many of the elements in the “brave new world” that contemporary readers find jarring actually appealed to Huxley. The sorting of individuals by type, eugenic breeding, and hierarchic leadership were policies for which he had proselytized. The problem with the dystopia he created in Brave New World, as he saw it, was the lack of spiritual insight and spiritual greatness in its leaders. [Kindle location 2167](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2167)

Huxley was for eugenics.

> The “brave new world” is America, to some extent, or rather Huxley’s bleak view of America, which he once described as “a land where there is probably less personal freedom than in any other country in the world with the possible exception of Bolshevik Russia.” [Kindle location 2181](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2181)

> America’s failing, Huxley insisted, was its “lack of an intellectual aristocracy . . . secure in its position and authority” so that it could constrain people from “thinking and acting . . . like the characters in a novel by Sinclair Lewis.” [Kindle location 2186](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2186)

> This potent critique of mass culture was suddenly muted in the 1930s by the rise of the Communist Party in the United States, which required of the intellectuals who flocked to it a sentimental reconsideration of the masses. And it seemed as though it had been discredited to some degree by World War II. The middle-class “hollow men (as in T.S. Eliot’s poem of the same name), whom liberal intellectuals had been taught to despise, proved their mettle by defeating the Nazis and saving Western civilization itself. [Kindle location 2189](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2189)

> “The squares, boobs, Babbitts, and Rotarians despised by literary liberals would soon again become targets for their betters. America would once again become the land where the masses were organized to crush an artist’s hopes.” [Kindle location 2194](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2194)

> Rosenberg, a contributing editor of the Socialist magazine Dissent, explained the dangers at hand. “Contemporary man finds that his life has been emptied of meaning, that it has been trivialized,” Rosenberg wrote. “He is alienated from his past, from his work, his community, and possibly from himself—although this ‘self’ is hard to locate. At the same time he has an unprecedented amount of time on his hands which he must kill . . . lest it kill him.” The evidence for this [Kindle location 2213](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2213)

> On the surface the Donald Duck and Mickey Mouse cartoons seem merely pleasant little fictions but they are actually over laden with the most aggressive, competitive, and sadistic themes. On the verge of hysteria, Donald Duck is a frustrated little monster who has something of the SS man in him and whom we, also having something of the SS man in us, naturally find quite charming. [Kindle location 2221](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2221)

> “In the over-developed countries,” wrote Herbert Marcuse, who became the most famous Frankfurt School theoretician of the 1960s, “an ever-larger part of the population becomes one huge captive audience—captured not by a total regime, but by the liberties of the citizens whose media of amusement and elevation compels the Other to partake of their sounds, sights, and smells.” He was arguing, in effect, for greater social segregation between the elite and the hoi polloi. [Kindle location 2242](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2242)

> “The work week has shrunk, real wages have risen, and never in history have so many people attained such a high standard of living as in this country since 1945,” Macdonald complained. “Money, leisure, and knowledge,” he went on, “the prerequisites for culture, are more plentiful and more evenly distributed than ever before.” And that was the problem. Educated at Phillips Exeter Academy and Yale and associated with the anti-Stalinist leftists at Partisan Review, Macdonald couldn’t bring himself to support the United States against the Nazis in World War II, on the grounds that “Europe has its Hitlers, but we have our Rotarians.” [Kindle location 2248](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2248)

Hitler = Rotarians!

> “middlebrow.” The great danger to America, he argued in his most famous essay, “Masscult and Midcult,” was the effort by the masses to elevate themselves culturally. [Kindle location 2254](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2254)

> “Two cultures have developed in this country,” insisted Macdonald, and “it is to the national interest to keep them separate.” [Kindle location 2257](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2257)

> vicious. “Already we have far too much of this insipidity—masses of people who are half breeds” daring to partake of “the American culture of the cheap newspaper, the movies, the popular song, the ubiquitous automobile” and creating “hordes of men and women without a spiritual country . . . without taste, without standards but those of the mob.” The toxic intermixing of high and low was nearly unstoppable. The hordes were at the gate: “The masses are not people, they are not The Man in the Street or The Average Man, they are not even that figment of liberal condescension, The Common Man. The masses are, rather, man as non-man.” He approvingly quoted author Roger Fry’s misanthropic notion: “Humans have lost the power to be individuals. They have become social insects like bees and ants.” But for Macdonald, this was a particularly American pathology. [Kindle location 2258](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2258)

> By the late 1970s, the aim of camp to “dethrone the serious” had all but succeeded. And once the last remnants of bourgeois morality largely melted away, there was little to make even mock cultural rebellion meaningful. The “serious” was replaced by a cheerful mindlessness, and the cultural striving [Kindle location 2305](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2305)

> economy. The number of Americans between ages twenty-five and twenty-nine who had a college degree nearly tripled from 1950 to 1970, growing from 7.7 to 20.7 percent of the population. [Kindle location 2380](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2380)

> In the late nineteenth century, William James famously argued that college graduates would have to do for democracy what dukes and earls had done for monarchy—they would have to become an aristocracy of sorts. [Kindle location 2381](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2381)

> It could have for its aim the improvement of the quality of our living. . . . I have a picture of a host of eager young missionaries swarming over the land spreading the health knowledge, the knowledge of domestic science, of gardening, of tastefulness, that they have learned in school. . . . Food inspection, factory inspection, organized relief, the care of dependents, playground service, nursing in hospitals—all this would be a field for such an educational service. The “army of youth” [Kindle location 2385](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2385)

> John Kenneth Galbraith, argued that control of economic life was passing from the owners of capital to the professional managers who actually ran the country’s production facilities. [Kindle location 2398](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2398)

> Capitalism would be transformed from within, he contended. Rather than maximizing profits, the vanguard of university-trained managers would reshape the American economy according to the Wellsian values they had studied in college. Galbraith’s influence among liberals derived from his snobbish wit, as when he constructed straw men whom he could mock as captives of “the conventional wisdom.” Galbraith, more than any other liberal, was able to meld two of the central strands of 1920s liberalism: a Menckenesqe contempt for the burghers and an undue regard for technocrats who cloaked their prejudices in the language of social science. [Kindle location 2400](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2400)

> treated.” Few listened to Daniel Patrick Moynihan’s warning that the Kennedy Brain Trust had engaged in “a serious misreading of the Eisenhower years,” when “it had seemed that men of vigor and purpose could not but do infinitely better than such a crowd of Rotarians and press agents.” In January of 1963, [Kindle location 2410](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2410)

> “Statesman and savants, builders and even priests are their servants,” intoned Time. “Science is at the apogee of its power.” The [Kindle location 2414](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2414)

> world-changing. “The land” said journalist Ward Elliot, “rang with calls for more Ph.D.s to win all the wars that we were fighting with a grand mobilization of expertise.” [Kindle location 2416](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2416)

> Port Huron statement, criticized liberalism for its timidity. Liberals, they insisted, possessed the knowledge to transform the world but were too cowardly to actually see the job through, so that the young radicals would have to step forth and finish the work. As an example of the new knowledge, the Port Huron statement endorsed the development of nuclear power. [Kindle location 2421](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2421)

> There was a smooth transition from militant liberalism to what was dubbed New Leftism. [Kindle location 2427](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2427)

Militant "liberalism" became New Left. 

> They had reason to be appalled by Vietnam, but also, as Paul Potter of SDS put it directly: “The intellectuals want power.” Bill Moyers, a young aide [Kindle location 2454](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2454)

> “The elite intelligentsia,” said Daniel Patrick Moynihan in response to the brutal attacks he suffered for acknowledging the breakdown of the black family, “are turning against the country—in science, in politics, in the foundations of patriotism.” [Kindle location 2464](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2464)

> Imbued with the promise of an earthly paradise of sexual freedom, the emerging left-liberalism promoted both the privatization of virtue and vice as well as the politicization of the personal. In the new dispensation, repression of individual libidinal desire was equated with the kind of political oppression associated with police states. [Kindle location 2509](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2509)

> fulfillment. “In SDS,” explained an associate of Hayden’s, “fucking is a statement of community” and a cure for alienation. This emphasis on the intensity of experience as the measure of value made possible arguments that gained wide currency, even though such arguments not only resisted facts, they tried to transcend them [Kindle location 2513](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2513)

> “In the future, it is possible that the new occupational structure will provide the basis of a two-class society of educated technocrats and janitors,” he wrote. “If this were to happen, then the emergence of an unprecedented number of college graduates . . . would have the most reactionary consequences.” [Kindle location 2518](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2518)

> Eric Hoffer, the longshoreman philosopher who watched as the San Francisco docks automated in the 1950s and ’60s, saw the underside of liberalism and how it reinforced the changes that were occurring in the economy. Hoffer celebrated the American exceptionalism that liberals had been bemoaning ever since the 1920s, and he feared that with the coming of the post-industrial age, America would “no longer be the common man’s continent.” “The masses are on their way out,” he wrote. “[The] elites are finally catching up with us. We can hear the swish of leather as saddles are heaved on our backs. The intellectuals and the young, booted and spurred, feel themselves born to ride us.” Hoffer foresaw that the New Class would try to govern the working people much as colonial officials governed the natives. They are, he wrote, an “army of scribes clamoring for a society in which planning, regulation, and supervision are paramount and the prerogative of the educated.” And although the California State University system in which there is now one bureaucrat for every professor was well in the future, he anticipated that “since the tempo of the production of the literate is continually increasing, the prospect is of ever swelling bureaucracies.” [Kindle location 2523](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2523)

> The left-liberalism that emerged from the 1960s was simultaneously statist and libertarian. As [Kindle location 2541](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2541)

> The upshot was a country in which liberal lawyers, acting as the advanced guard of a reforming bureaucracy, were pitted against the wider society so that mutuality gave way to competing loyalties. [Kindle location 2542](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2542)

> A century and a quarter earlier, Alexis de Tocqueville saw that because an entire people cannot “rise above itself” only a “despot” could free African Americans from the shackles of legalized prejudice. That “despot” was the federal courts. [Kindle location 2569](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2569)

> “What Brown had begot,” noted Judge J. Harvie Wilkerson in 1979, “was a union of the mightiest and lowliest in America, a mystical passionate union bound by the pained depths of the black man’s cry for justice and the moral authority, unique to the Court, to see that justice realized.” The great misfortune of the 1950s, [Kindle location 2575](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2575)

> Fanon’s most influential book, The Wretched of the Earth, published in America shortly before the 1965 Watts riots, rejected acculturation to Western ways and argued that collective action was the only curative for the psychic wounds of colonialism and racism. “Violence alone, violence committed by the people, violence organized and educated by its leaders,” he wrote, “makes it possible for the masses to understand social truths” and frees them from “despair and inaction.”* [Kindle location 2620](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2620)

> “The richest inheritance any child can have is a stable, loving, disciplined family,” Moynihan wrote. Moynihan’s solution, largely lost in the controversy the report generated, was “to bring the structure of the Negro family in line with the rest of our society” by providing work for black men. To provide that work, the charming Moynihan—a man of many tensions, who feared that upper-middle-class liberals were driving white ethnics from the Democratic Party—called for both racial quotas and European-style family allowances. It was among the more conceptually and financially radical proposals ever submitted to a president—and it is even more fascinating, in retrospect, to think that its author would be considered only a few years later as one of the founding members of the group of thinkers known as the neoconservatives. The defining quality of the neoconservatives when it came to domestic policy was a newly rueful skepticism about the efficacy of massive government programs exactly like the one Moynihan had proposed. “The Moynihan Report” produced an avalanche of hatred that can be rightly described as the closing of the liberal mind. In 1965, writing to Gunnar Myrdal, the pioneering student of American race relations, a staggered Moynihan told the Swede that he had been violently “anathematized as a racist, a fascist, an authoritarian, a bourgeois, and so across the spectrum of epithets.” “Everybody,” recounted a black feminist, “wanted to cut Daniel Moynihan’s heart out and feed it to the dogs.” The new “liberalism,” noted an agonized Moynihan, “couldn’t cope with the truth.” The truth was just as he had diagnosed it: For the next three decades, the ongoing agonies of the black family were accompanied by the death throes of a formerly triumphant liberalism. [Kindle location 2683](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2683)

> To decentralize…implement probably on just the community level—socialism. And that’s probably too Marxist-Leninist for those motherfuckers to understand, but we think that Stalin was very clear in this concept, that socialism could be implemented in one country; we say it can be implemented in one community. [Kindle location 2731](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2731)

> Frank Stanton [Kindle location 2735](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2735)

> “the most oppressive country in the world, maybe in the history of the world.” [Kindle location 2736](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2736)

> The party for “the beautiful people,” explained Tom Wolfe in his memorable account of the event, was a “radical chic” means for the guests to certify their superiority over the hated middle class, the little people who had voted for John Lindsay’s opponents because they feared crime. The effect of the 1960s riots and the [Kindle location 2738](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2738)

> Like devout Christians getting right with Jesus, liberals struggled to get right with racism. [Kindle location 2745](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2745)

> In the 1920s, the first generation of liberals looked to Mexican peasants and East European mystics for inspiration when they sought to cleanse themselves of the emotional impurities imposed by middle-class mores. During the 1930s, as Whittaker Chambers recounted in his moving memoir, Witness, liberals saw “the working class as a source of unspoiled energy which may salvage the crumbling West.” In the 1950s, the anthropologist Margaret Mead depicted the islanders on Samoa—who had been freed from slavery, cannibalism, and human sacrifice by an alliance of natives and Christian missionaries—as people free of the Western foibles of sexual inhibition and jealousy. The naive Mead, like her successors in the 1960s, had been played for a fool by the locals. [Kindle location 2748](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2748)

> Fidel Castro had been an admirer of Francisco Franco, but he and his knight errant Che Guevara became icons among America liberals. [Kindle location 2845](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2845)

> “declaration of war on the masses by the higher men is needed.” [Kindle location 2856](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2856)

> Referring to blue-collar workers, he dismissed “the facile assumption that the people at a disadvantage will be stirred to anything more than chaotic and destructive expressions of resentment.” But, added Wells in Open Conspiracy, “If . . . we lose the delusive comfort of belief in that magic giant, the Proletariat . . . we clear the way for the recognition of an élite of intelligent, creative-minded people.” Foreshadowing the ’60s, he insisted that they were the ones who should make “an organized effort to recast the world.” Wells was rhapsodic about the possibilities: Within the peace and freedom that the Open Conspiracy is winning for us, all these good things that escape us now may be ensured. A graver humanity, stronger, more lovely, longer lived, will learn and develop the ever-enlarging possibilities of its destiny. For the first time, the full beauty of this world will be revealed to its unhurried eyes. . . . And all the best of us [Kindle location 2856](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2856)

> The Democrats’ simultaneous shift up the income scale and to the left was reflected in a televised 1972 confrontation between John Kerry, of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War, and his fellow naval officer John O’Neill, a supporter of the war. The men would face off again thirty-two years later, in 2004, when Kerry was the Democrat’s presidential nominee. In his book The Rise of the Unmeltable Ethnics, Michael Novak saw the underlying class dynamic that only intensified in the following years: [Kindle location 2905](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2905)

> Nearly half of Nixon’s cabinet members were social “scientists.” [Kindle location 2915](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2915)

> In 1969, for the first time since the National Science Foundation was created in 1950, social “science” was given an equal place at the grant-giving table with the hard sciences. Also in 1969, the Swedish Academy saw fit to endow for the first time a Nobel Prize in economics, proof positive that social “science” had made it. Between 1970 and 1975, government spending on social “science,” which had increased rapidly through the ’60s, was almost doubled under Republican presidents. But within a few years, the seemingly magnificent edifice of social science was in shambles, its reach having far exceeded its grasp. The field’s technocratic authority was dramatically weakened by criticism from both blue-collar America and from the new liberals, relying more and more on moral authoritarianism, who saw social science as a threat to their aims. In the wake of the 1960s riots and the rolling riot of crime that followed, lower-middle-class whites discovered that the costs of racial integration were to be placed squarely on their shoulders by preachy liberals who were insulated from the effects of their own policies. [Kindle location 2915](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2915)

Cost of segregation on lower middle class whites.

> “We want to eliminate poverty, crime, and drug addiction,” said the Social Science Research Council, “but we don’t know how.” When asked what had gone wrong, Daniel Patrick Moynihan replied that the real disaster was social science. It was time, he said, for social scientists to assert their absence of knowledge “with respect to many of the urgent issues.” Social science, as the emerging neoconservative movement liked to point out, was far better at showing why policies failed than how they could succeed. [Kindle location 2929](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2929)

Moynihan on failure of social sci 

> In preparation for the speech, Carter told his guests at the Camp David presidential retreat: I think it’s inevitable that there will be a lower standard of living than what everybody had always anticipated . . . I think there’s going to have to be a reorientation of what people value in their lives. I believe that there has to be a more equitable sharing of what we have. . . . The only trend is downward. [Kindle location 3002](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3002)

> Barnet drew a contrast between the happy past and the apocalyptic future: In a traditional society where nothing changes, most people accept their place with a certain grace. . . . But when the principle of mobility is introduced into a society and envy is stimulated to induce people to work harder and to consume more, the pain of deprivation becomes more intense and gaps begin to matter. . . . It is the monumental social problem of the planet, the cause of mass starvation, repression, and crime, petty and cosmic. [Kindle location 3012](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3012)

> Barnet represented a powerful new current, one that Marx in his day had dismissed as “feudal socialism.” [Kindle location 3017](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3017)

Feudal socialism.

> The Seventies, notes British journalist Andrew Anthony, were “a period of radical possibilities, the last time educated people could speak of ‘revolution’ without joking.” It [Kindle location 3020](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3020)

> economist Robert Lekachman saw a return of the 1930s and asked, “Is the system finished?” Economist Robert Heilbroner saw the end of capitalism at hand, while world historian Arnold Toynbee predicted a “stockade society” and a “siege economy” overseen by “ruthless authoritarian governments” as a consequence of the downturn. [Kindle location 3023](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3023)

> Daniel Patrick Moynihan, in 1975, foresaw radical changes ahead: “Liberal Democracy . . . [is] a holdover form of government . . . which has simply no relevance for the future. It is where the world was, not where it is going.” [Kindle location 3025](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3025)

> “By the proper choice of monetary and fiscal policy, we as the artists, mixing the colors of our palette, can have the capital formation and rate of current consumption that we desire,” explained the preeminent liberal economist Paul Samuelson. The full potential of the economy and therefore full employment would be achieved by Galbraith’s “best and brightest,” who would masterfully manage aggregate demand in the name of the collective interest of the country. If all went well, argued an enthusiastic Galbraith, the de-Stalinized Soviet Union and the West, which was making fuller use of the state, would “converge” in a common model of industrial governance. President [Kindle location 3080](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3080)

Danielson quote about getting full employment t 

> Kennedy “took little cognizance of the roaring inflation, high interest rates, and ballooning federal deficit . . . and pushed instead for a huge domestic spending package,” Carter aide Stuart Eizenstat accurately observed. [Kindle location 3127](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3127)

> The anti-progress mind-set was by then familiar ground for liberals. Back in the 1970s, environmentalist E.J. Mishan had proposed dramatic solutions to the growth dilemma. He suggested banning all international air travel so that only those with the time and money could get to the choice spots—thus reintroducing, in effect, the class system. Should this prove too radical, Mishan proposed banning air travel “to a wide variety of mountain, lake, and coastal resorts, and to a selection of some islands from the many scattered about the globe; and within such areas also to abolish all motorised traffic.” Echoing John Stuart Mill’s mid-nineteenth-century call for a “stationary state” without economic growth, Mishan argued that “regions may be set aside for the true nature lover who is willing to make his pilgrimage by boat and willing leisurely to explore islands, valleys, bays, woodlands, on foot or on horseback.” [Kindle location 3297](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3297)

> energies. For instance, John Ruskin, a leading nineteenth-century Tory Radical and a proponent of handicrafts, declaimed against “ilth,” a negative version of the wealth produced by manufacturing. [Kindle location 3307](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3307)

> Like the Tory Radicals, today’s liberal gentry see the untamed middle classes as the true enemy. “Environmentalism offered the extraordinary opportunity to combine the qualities of virtue and selfishness,” wrote William Tucker in a groundbreaking 1977 Harper’s article on the opposition to construction of the Storm King power plant along New York’s Hudson River. Tucker described the remarkable sight of a fleet of yachts—including one piloted by the old Stalinist singer Pete Seeger—sailing up and down the Hudson in protest. [Kindle location 3309](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3309)

> Touring American campuses in the mid-1970s, Norman Macrae of The Economist was shocked “to hear so many supposedly left-wing young Americans who still thought they were expressing an entirely new and progressive philosophy as they mouthed the same prejudices as Trollope’s nineteenth-century Tory squires: attacking any further expansion of industry and commerce as impossibly vulgar, because ecologically unfair to their pheasants and wild ducks.” [Kindle location 3315](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3315)

> lives. Gentry liberals—progressives against progress—turn out to resemble nothing so much as nineteenth-century conservatives. [Kindle location 3324](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3324)

> Iraq. Moore’s website at the time was publishing the rather unoriginal critique that “Americans are the stupidest people in the world.” [Kindle location 3608](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3608)

> Novelist Jane Smiley played this decade’s Mencken; Kerry lost, she explained because “red-state types, above all, do not want to be told what to do—they prefer to be ignorant. As a result, they are virtually unteachable.” [Kindle location 3614](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3614)

> Michael Tomasky saw it similarly. After thirty-five years of effort, “what the Democrats still don’t have,” he wrote “is a philosophy, a big idea that unites their proposals and converts them from a hodgepodge of narrow and specific fixes into a vision for society.” [Kindle location 3628](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3628)

> they despised the Evangelical “lizzardheads” who lived in “dumbfuckistan”; they detested the Clintons as compromisers whose strategies of triangulation had turned the Democrats, as they saw it, into me-too Republicans chasing after the middle-class vote; they loathed the Democratic Leadership Council and, as Norman Lear put it, “Joe Fucking Lieberman”; and they were sure, insofar as they gave it any thought, that the war on terror was largely a scam that had been sold to the “morons” of Middle America. The billionaire progressives, the suburban MoveOn activists, and the left-wing bloggers were drawn together by hostility not only to Bush and the centrist Democratic Leadership Council, which was driven to extinction, but also to the private-sector middle class they scorned. [Kindle location 3633](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3633)

> book The Argument, to create “some compelling case for the future of an activist American government.” The [Kindle location 3645](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3645)

> “You know what they say about the difference between a terrorist and a billionaire, ‘You can negotiate with a terrorist.’ ” The joke was not well received. She, too, was deposed. But why should they compromise? [Kindle location 3665](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3665)

> out? “The strange truth was that the zillionaires had come to see themselves, however improbably, as the oppressed,” Bai wrote. “They knew what was right about what was best for the country, and if the foolish voters didn’t see it as clearly as they did, then it could only be explained by some nefarious conservative plot. They imagined themselves to be victimized and powerless, kept down somehow by the Man.” The gilded [Kindle location 3668](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3668)

> In a few years, scientist James Lovelock, the godfather of modern environmentalism, the very man who conceived of Gaia, noted with asperity that global temperatures since the turn of the millennium had not risen as the computer-based climate models had predicted. [Kindle location 3701](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3701)

> Lovelock explained: “The problem is we don’t know what the climate is doing. We thought we knew twenty years ago.” [Kindle location 3704](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3704)

> T.S. Eliot. Sounding like one of the literary Bolsheviks of the 1920s, Obama told one girlfriend in a letter that Eliot represented “a certain kind of conservatism which I respect more than bourgeois liberalism.” [Kindle location 3772](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=3772)

> 