# The Barbarous Years: The Peopling of British North America: The Conflict of Civilizations, 1600-1675 by Bernard Bailyn

## Chapter 1: The Americans

> But their experiences were not mainly of triumph but of confusion, failure, violence, and the loss of civility as they sought to normalize abnormal situations and to recapture lost worlds, in the process tearing apart the normalities of the people whose world they had invaded.[(131)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=131)

> All the people involved—native Americans, Europeans, latterly Africans—struggled for survival with outlandish aliens, rude people, uncultured in what mattered. All—native Americans, Europeans, and Africans—felt themselves dragged down or threatened with descent into squalor and savagery. All sought to restore the civility they once had known. Later generations, reading back[(134)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=134)

> THEY LIVED crowded lives.[(149)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=149)

> In this magico-animist world taboos abounded. To obey them would minimize offenses and so help maintain stability; to violate them would lead to disaster. The possible effects of women’s “uncleanliness” and their procreative processes had to be strenuously controlled.[(177)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=177)

'ocd' of premodern peoples ...cf Leviticus. we are no different today 

> failure of reciprocal trade, and to capture prisoners who might replace deaths or abductions incurred in previous conflicts (“mourning wars”) and to restore lost dignity and pride. Body parts—severed heads or hands—of warriors who had fought improperly might be offered to victims’ families to maintain the stability of tribal relations. Village life and political alliances were based on reciprocity: the fear of supernatural retribution was in itself a form of social control. Productive land had to be left fallow to recover the nourishment of which it had been robbed; rich fishing grounds had to be vacated to prevent irreversible depletion; girls given in marriage had somehow to be replaced, by compensation to a woman’s family “for the loss of her valuable labor and child-bearing potential.”6 But reciprocity, the[(193)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=193)

good comparison to later capitalist/total war. can't imagine the Nazis doing ... 

> eaten. Another, driven to accomplish a dream of captivity, had himself stripped naked, dragged through his own village, ridiculed and reviled, and tied up for execution; but then, having sung his death song, he stopped, hoping that this proximate enactment would be acceptable as suffering enough.[(233)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=233)

just amazing what people do for ideas. and we still do it 

> In some regions these passages from childhood were vague in structure, mild and diffused, though they usually involved some form of ritual self-abasement to invoke one’s guardian spirit, whose presence would ever thereafter be represented in the pouch of charms one carried with one. In other regions, however, puberty rites were rigorous and severe. Nothing could be more demanding than the Powhatans’ huskanaw,[(253)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=253)

initiation rites preparing for harsh lives. cf Kenya but like everywhere vary from community . not always harsh. 

> process required of adolescent sons of leading families that could last for several months and was calculated to be so physically devastating as to wipe out all memory of earlier life, with its emotional ties of dependence. Some did not survive the ordeal of beatings, starvation, drug-induced bouts of madness, confinement in narrow “sugar-loaf” cages, and the tortuous recovery through contrived setbacks. Among those who, at the end of it all, failed to show the expected marks of total transformation and were made to repeat the procedure, death was not uncommon.[(256)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=256)

> Beaten continuously, the prisoners were often maimed—fingers chopped or bitten off to incapacitate them for further warfare, backs and shoulders slashed—then systematically tortured, by women gashing their bodies and tearing off strips of flesh, by children scorching the most sensitive parts of their immobilized bodies with red-hot coals—while judgment was passed on whether they would live as dependents, in effect as slaves, or die. If spared, their lives as slaves involved brutal humiliation, complete repudiation of their former lives, and changes of name. While they might eventually rise to prominence in their new society, they were seldom free of the stigma of subjection. If condemned, they would most likely be burned to death after disembowelment, some parts of their bodies having been eaten and their blood drunk in celebration by their captors. This[(269)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=269)

so much for idealistic view of this particular past

> but others were the results of deliberate burnings and small-scale efforts at brush removal and deforestation. On[(312)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=312)

> probably had a combined population of between 20,000 and 30,000, though these communities were scattered in a broad band stretching 150 miles[(320)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=320)

> Iroquois towns may have had populations of 2,000.[(321)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=321)

> Delaware, together had a population of just over 50,000—[(322)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=322)

> conversely most of the marine shell beads treasured by Appalachian tribes and Iroquois peoples in the north and west were products of craftsmen working on the Atlantic beaches, especially those in the Chesapeake Bay area, who sent their goods northward up the Susquehanna[(400)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=400)

Great diversity. like PNG

> technical accomplishment lay in turning the shells of the quahog, or hardshell clam, into the beads that came to be known as wampum.[(576)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=576)

amazing Indian tech 

> The first, dominating the Virginia plain, was the brutally expansive “empire” of Powhatan. That dominant chiefdom had emerged only in the recent past, sometime between the 1550s and 1580s, and was still in the process of expansion and consolidation when the English[(619)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=619)

Powhatan 

> Concentration on fur hunts upset the ancient pattern of shifting seasonal activities,[(669)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=669)

fur trade: a new virus that changed everything 

## CHAPTER 2: Death on a Coastal Fringe

> IT WAS INTO this still-traditional though changing, animist, violently competitive, and delicately poised world, constantly beset by disbalancing shocks, that a small contingent of Englishmen arrived in 1607. They were people whose way of life, sensibilities, assumptions, skills, knowledge, social relations, and aspirations— their entire experience and view of the world and the universe— could scarcely have been more different from those of the people who watched their arrival from the shores of Chesapeake Bay.

> an estimated 8 percent lived in communities of over five thousand, and many of the town dwellers were partly involved in agriculture.[(712)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=712)

> itself. But beneath all the tenurial variations lay the concept and the experience, direct or indirect, of land as a possession, a commodity to be personally owned, leased, loaned, sold, or otherwise disposed of.2[(717)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=717)

> They were a mobile people. Though most lived out their lives in their native parishes, there were short-distance movements everywhere, as marginal and ambitious people in the countryside sought security and stability. Young people commonly circulated as servants among households of higher or equal status, while unattached farmworkers and vagrants—propelled by population growth (35 percent in Elizabeth’s reign, 1558–1603), by decline in real wages, and by the extension of commercial farming—roamed the local countrysides seeking employment. Some went longer distances—eight to twenty miles, distances short enough to allow easy return—to reach provincial towns and cities, which grew steadily in these years. And beyond all of those local and regional movements there was a growing drift of people moving long distances, mainly south and east, into the great catch basin of London. While the[(719)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=719)

> Disease devastated its slums—almost a quarter of the city’s population died in the last year of Elizabeth’s reign—but newcomers from all over the realm restored the losses. It has been estimated that about an eighth of all those who survived infancy outside London migrated to London in the early seventeenth century, rising to a sixth later in the century. Plague deaths of some 15 percent of the total would be made up within two years.3[(728)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=728)

> England’s expansionist tendencies were driven too by its sense of responsibility for the survival of Protestantism abroad, by the dawning of a “British ideology of empire” based on the “composite monarchy” of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by the promotional skills of the geographer Richard Hakluyt and publicists like Samuel Purchas, and by the ambitions of “projectors” for whom colonization was “a project among projects”—all of whom had visions of England’s future as a colonial power that radiated through the higher echelons of government.[(741)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=741)

> The dominant energizing force in the early seventeenth century, however, was the newly empowered commercial organizations: the provincial trading associations in Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Bristol, Exeter, Southampton, Chester, and Hull, the Merchant Adventurers of London, the Muscovy or Russia Company, the Eastland Company, the Levant Company, and finally, the great East India Company (1600). At their head, directing the expansion of these sophisticated, Crown-chartered monopoly companies—overseas trading guilds, in effect—was a small circle of financial magnates, who controlled large sums of capital, sat in various combinations on numerous corporate boards, and were close to the key figures in the government. Though not alien from the great landed interests, these merchants were a distinct force in English life, secure in their control of large-scale commerce, eager to expand their operations.5[(746)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=746)

> So John White added to his eyewitness paintings of the placid, agreeable-looking North Carolina natives he encountered at Roanoke in 1585 a set of vivid, wildly imaginative depictions of pre-historic Picts, ferocious, naked, blue-painted head-hunters. These startling images of monstrous savages were reproduced in popular engravings “for to showe,” the legend explained, “how that the inhabitants of the great Brettanie have bin in times past as savvage as those of Virginia.” The[(772)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=772)

> The “wild Irish” were said by would-be colonizers in the 1560s to be godless. They “blaspheme, thei murder, commit whoredom, hold no wedlocke, ravish, steal, and commit all abomination without scruple … matrimonie emongs them is no more regarded … than conjunction betwene unreasonable beasts, perjurie, robberie and murder [are] counted alloweable.” For such people—“more uncivill, more uncleanly, more barbarous and more brutish in their customs … then in any other part of the world”—no treatment could be too severe; any brutality would be justified if it resulted in “the suppressing and reforming of the loose, barbarous and most wicked life of that savage nation.” To reform “so barbarous a nation,” by whatever forceful means, could only be “a goodly and commendable deede,” but until that reformation might happen, they could be dealt with best by expulsion beyond a pale around the English settlements, which would at least protect the English settlers from succumbing to Ireland’s barbarous ways. And there was for Elizabethans a natural conflation of the “wild Irish” and the American natives because many of the leaders of the first settlements in North America were also landowners and military officers in Ireland and could themselves see the ostensible similarities between the two native peoples—in social practices, and pagan rituals, “bestial” feeding habits, flimsy housing, and sexual promiscuity. The similarities were unmistakable.9[(781)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=781)

> little in common except barbarousness, paganism, and the threat of dark mysteries as yet unrevealed.[(796)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=796)

Indians looked like Scottish Picts to English. many first colonists were Scotch Irish who had first gained experience in Ireland dealing with "Wild Irish".

> And both knew the horrors of physical cruelty. If the Indians sanctioned the torture of enemies and the most agonizing forms of execution, so too did the English. Ordinary crimes were punished by public floggings that could be severe, confessions were extracted by torture, and those convicted of treason and some felonies were hanged before large and enthusiastic crowds, cut down while still alive, disemboweled, castrated, beheaded, and hacked into quarters for display. Women were not mutilated, but for heresy, treason, or killing husband or master they could be burned at the stake, though compassionate executioners might strangle them before lighting the fire. And some of the most serious offenders were broken on the wheel—that is, spread-eagled in public spectacles, their bones smashed, their bodies eviscerated before final execution, their heads and quartered bodies displayed prominently in public places. England was spared some of the more “unspeakable litanies of suffering” that were known to be inflicted on judicial victims in central and eastern Europe—blinding, tearing with red-hot tongs, flaying, crushing into pointed stakes, sawing off of limbs. But in England too witches and heretics, like the Indians’ captives, were burned alive—not in rare instances, but commonly. Mary Tudor, in her reign of five years, burned nearly three hundred men and women for their Protestantism (technically, heresy); Elizabeth executed almost the same number for their Catholicism (technically, treason).13[(821)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=821)

> They were a strange lot, these early English settlers in North America—not a cohort of settling immigrants but a band of adventurous gentlemen, younger sons of distinguished families, drawn to what seemed a fascinating adventure in an exotic land and a possible source of personal gain and national prestige, together with a small group of veteran soldiers of fortune and a contingent of artisans and laborers. Of sixty-eight arrivals in this first shipment to Virginia whose names survive in the records, thirty-seven were either gentlemen or military and maritime “captains.” Only twenty-seven were identified as artisans, laborers, and “boyes.” The status and high-level connections of the leaders were remarkable. Among the gentlemen were George Percy, brother of the Earl of Northumberland, then imprisoned for involvement in the Gunpowder Plot, and closely connected with Sir Walter Raleigh and his adviser, the scientist, linguist, and explorer Thomas Hariot, who had participated in the settlement at Roanoke in 1585 and written the first account of the region’s people, flora, and fauna; John Martin, son of the Lord Mayor of London and Master of the Mint, and brother-in-law of the highest law lord, the Master of the Rolls; and three members of the Gosnold family, prosperous Suffolk and Essex landowners and London lawyers, related to the Virginia Company’s merchant financiers and connected both to Richard Hakluyt, the geographer and colonial promoter, and to the family of Sir Francis Bacon, king’s counsel, later attorney general and Lord Chancellor.16[(853)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=853)

> Well connected, these adventurers of the upper gentry and aristocracy were educated and sophisticated. Davison, like Martin trained in the law, was a poet in a family of poets. Thorpe was a “student of Indian views on religion and astronomy.” Francis Wyatt wrote verses and was something of a student of political theory. Alexander Whitaker, MA, author of Good Newes from Virginia (1612), was the worthy heir “of a good part of the learning of his renowned father,” the master of St. John’s College and Regius Professor of Divinity at Cambridge. Pory, MA, who would become the speaker of Virginia’s first representative assembly, “protege and disciple of Hakluyt,” a translator from Italian and Arabic and formerly a teacher of Greek in Cambridge University, assured his patron, in a letter from Virginia sprinkled with Latin, that “nexte after my penne,” in “the solitary uncouthnes of this place,” he was determined “to have some good book alwayes in store” and begged for copies of the publications he was missing. And George Sandys, a member of Lord Falkland’s literary circle, continued, while in Virginia, to work on his translation of Ovid’s Metamorphoses.17[(878)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=878)

> The freebooting style of these soldiers of fortune, all of them war veterans, “headstrong, giddy, and insubordinate,” their abrasive egos, and their explosive tempers, set them apart in the history of English colonization. It[(895)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=895)

> But we now know that his autobiographical accounts, though boastful and fancifully embroidered, are largely accurate. It is true, as he said, that as a teenager, having schooled himself in the art of war, he had fought against the Spanish in the Low Countries, thereafter had seen service in France, toured the Mediterranean on a piratical merchant vessel, and finally had joined the Austrian forces fighting the Turks. In Transylvania he had killed and perhaps had beheaded three Turkish officers in dramatic jousting duels (a feat he later blazoned on his coat of arms), was captured and enslaved by the Turks, but after noting carefully the way of life of the Turks, he managed to escape by murdering his owner with a threshing bat, and then made his way back to western Europe via Russia, Poland, and the German and Czech lands. Failing to find further military employment either in Europe or North Africa, he returned to England in 1604 where, through Gosnold, he was caught up in the plans for the colonization of Virginia. Courageous,[(922)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=922)

> “a triangular palisade of posts, rails, and poles, with bulwarks at the corners where cannon were mounted.”22[(987)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=987)

> The three years that followed was a period of violent dissension within the tiny palisaded settlement, confusion of purpose, physical devastation, and the emergence of a permanent pattern of race conflict. Death was everywhere.23[(990)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=990)

> Partly the confusion was generated by conflicts of purpose. Some struggled vainly to fulfill the company’s mandate to find the transmontane passage to the South Sea, to locate deposits of gold or other valuable commodities, to find the survivors of Raleigh’s Roanoke venture, and to establish—by force if necessary—the legal sovereignty of the English Crown over whatever native “princes” could be found. But others—led by Smith—insisted on providing first for the settlement’s long-term survival by building secure fortifications and housing, planting crops, and establishing reliable trading relations with the Indians or coercing them into supplying the colonists’ basic needs. In the best circumstances these conflicts would have threatened the survival of the settlement, but the circumstances could hardly have been worse.[(998)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=998)

> They were, he knew, in no way like the sophisticated Incas, Maya, or Aztecs; nor were they utterly savage and barbarous like the “wild Irish.”[(1065)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1065)

> lives. They would return violence for violence, but they did not need or seek the annihilation of their[(1078)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1078)

> enemies. Their wars were rarely genocidal. What they fought for, however savagely and cruelly, was the restoration of the equilibrium of forces, human and spiritual, that formed the inner stability of their world. The English, whose mere presence was disbalancing and whose designs were unknown, would have to be tested and constrained—not destroyed, for their goods were peculiarly valuable, but contained within and subordinated to the larger native system.32 For Powhatan himself, the need to contain[(1079)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1079)

> slain, he was brought to what appeared to be an execution block, surrounded by warriors “ready with clubs to beate out his braines.” Then at the final moment he was suddenly released, and he thereby, in the Indians’ eyes, symbolically entered a new life, adopted as a subordinate werowance, and by extension his people were symbolically enclosed within the constraints of Powhatan’s regime.[(1099)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1099)

how Powhatan thought he had subordinated the english 

> The parallel effort to subordinate and control barbarous and threatening people, at least symbolically, was played out reciprocally by the English the next year. Smith and Newport, on orders from London, led a troop of musketeers to present Powhatan with a plethora of gifts, including copper objects, a bedstead and bedclothes, a red coat, and a copper crown, the last a gift heavily freighted with symbolism from the great King James. When with difficulty they managed to place the crown on Powhatan’s forcibly bowed head, the ceremonial reduction of the chief of chiefs to the status of a vassal or local lord of King James was complete, symbolically confined within England’s sovereign power.36 These were calm[(1106)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1106)

> describe them.37 But the savage conflict that had begun in the first days intensified. Two weeks after the Jamestown settlement was established, two hundred warriors had assaulted the half-built fort, killing two[(1118)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1118)

> A captured workman accompanying Smith on his journey to the Chickahominies was tortured to death in ways familiar to the Indians but not to Englishmen, despite their knowledge of terror-inducing public executions. At a leisurely pace, his extremities were cut off with mussel shells and tossed into the fire before him; he was flayed—the skin was torn from his face and head—then disemboweled while still alive; and finally burned to ashes.[(1124)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1124)

torture of an English man early on 

> most of his contacts with the natives were ruthless raids on their villages to extract corn and other supplies for the starving settlers. When his demands were not met, he threatened murder, took hostages at gunpoint, “negotiated” by intimidation, and without hesitation seized from the natives precious supplies that were necessary for their tribes’ survival.[(1129)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1129)

Smith raiding villages 

> he simply grabbed the warrior chief “by his long locke,” jammed a pistol into his chest, and assured the surrounding warriors, in another florid oration, that if they “shed one drop of bloud of any of my men” he would not only kill their chief on the spot but wipe out every living soul of their “nation.”[(1137)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1137)

power of gun 

> began. A few of the “gastely and pale” inhabitants of the fort—we do not know how many—did “those things w[hi]ch seame incredible, as to digge upp deade corp[s]es outt of graves and to eate them … and some have Licked upp the Bloode w[hi]ch hathe fallen from their weake fellowes.” And even beyond that, Percy wrote, one man murdered his wife, “Ripped the Childe outt of her woambe … Chopped the Mother in pieces and sallted her for his foode.” Forced to confess “by torture[(1163)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1163)

English cannibalism... how bad it was. so why did they come? well, that was the new thing about Europeans. the system that made them want to do this. compare to say Mongols. how those too differ 

> hunge by the Thumbes w[i]th weightes att his feete a quarter of an howere,” the murderer was executed.[(1167)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1167)

savage punishment by english 

## CHAPTER 3: The “Hammerours’” Regime

> IT WAS no doubt a remarkable coincidence that Gates, moving downstream with his rescue party and the survivors of Jamestown, met the advance boats of the rest of the delayed fleet of 1609, including the new governor, the third Baron De La Warr. But the three ships and a pinnace then approaching—“ w[ i] th many gentlemen of quallety and thre hundrethe men[,] besydes greate store of victewles[,] municyon[,] and other p[ ro] vissyon”— would in any case have reestablished the colony. 1 They—and two additional fleets that arrived a year later with more than five hundred men, women, and children—were the product of a basic restructuring and refinancing of the Company in London and of its strenuous efforts at population recruitment. As a result, by 1618 Tidewater Virginia was transformed. Race relations were still not resolved—savage conflicts mingled with signs of accommodation—but the vague outline of a new civic order, based on an unexpected and still uncertain economy, had emerged after years of brutal coercion and social confusion.[(1191)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1191)

> The company would have a complete monopoly of all marketing of goods shipped home and would establish a severely coercive regime in the colony to overcome any future factionalism and enforce an effective work regime.2 The success of all of this[(1202)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1202)

> “Idle and wicked persons,” a company spokesman wrote, escaping from shame or fear, would ruin the place: they are “the weedes and ranknesse of this land who … must needes be the poison of [a new social body] so tender, feeble, and as yet unformed.” The colonists would have to be responsible working people, “families, of wife, children and Servants, to take fast holde and roote in that land.” Such[(1206)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1206)

> it would benefit the home country “by transplanting the rancknesse and multitude of increase in our people, of which there is left no vent but age, and evident danger that the number and infinitenesse of them will out-grow the matter whereon to worke for their life and sustentation, and shall one infest and become a burthen to another.”3[(1209)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1209)

getting rid of surplus people in England quote 

> a well-educated soldier-politician, Lord De La Warr, “whose Honour nor Fortune needs not any desperate medicine,” was chosen to serve as the all-powerful, “absolute” resident governor in chief; and a carefully detailed list of the kinds of people desired as settlers, their “faculties, arts and trades,” was published.[(1216)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1216)

> As for settlers, in an eventual land distribution “every individual, man or woman, and every child of twelve years and upwards,” would receive the value in land of one share of stock; and “persons of extraordinary character”—officials, justices, knights, gentlemen, physicians, and others “who are able to render very special services to the colony”—would be given provisions to help them settle “in proportion to the quality of each one” and eventual dividends in profits and land “according to the amount at which their persons and their services were estimated.”5 These enticements were broadcast[(1231)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1231)

> The nine vessels in that flotilla were a sensation as they sailed, with more than six hundred people aboard, slowly out of the Thames.6 Thomas West, Third Lord De La Warr (illustration credit 3.1) But the majority of the passengers aboard were far from the company’s ideal. The flow of well-connected, adventurous men “of birth and quality” continued, but the company’s efforts to recruit “sufficient, honest, and good artificers” still showed few results.[(1243)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1243)

> The company had been obliged to solicit the magistrates of London and other cities to encourage some of their “swarme of unnecessary inmates” who otherwise “must lye in the streetes” to join the emigration. And indeed the majority of those who reported to Smith’s office in Philpot Lane “to proffer their service in this action” were still of that “idle crue … of lascivious sonnes … bad servants … and ill husbands” who would “rather starve for hunger than lay their hands to labor.” But in addition to these “unruly youths … of most leaud [lewd] and bad condition,” casual laborers, rural vagrants, and urban drifters, there was added, by deliberate recruitment, a large contingent (perhaps as many as 150) of “old soldiers trained up in the Nether-lands” with experience in English military operations. Veterans not only of the Dutch wars but also of the savage campaigns in Ireland, typical of the plundering, half-vagabond troops of the time who were traded among commanders like cattle and whose service was likely to be cut short by death under degrading conditions, they would soon earn, in their time in Virginia, Hakluyt’s description of them as “hammerours” who would know how to “prepare” the Indians for “our preachers’ hands.”7[(1249)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1249)

who they had to settle for 

> With this unpromising mixture of “quality,” unruly, idle vagrants, and combat veterans, De La Warr began his effort to rebuild the colony. He set out the rules of government and sent some men to fish, others to revive the neglected cornfields and gardens; he saw to it that Jamestown’s church, palisades, and some of the houses and barracks were rebuilt. He also started the construction of two forts near the mouth of the James River and sent out expeditions to find provisions.[(1260)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1260)

> But the workers he had available, he wrote, were such “deboisht [debauched] hands … of such distempered bodies and infected mindes” that no example of goodness or threat of punishment “can deterr [them] from their habituall impieties or terrifie from a shameful death.” In their apathy, bewilderment, and disorientation—driven to labor as they never had been before and under punishing physical conditions—they quickly succumbed to despair and disease. In the first six months after De La Warr’s arrival, one-third of the settlers had sickened and died or were killed by the Indians.[(1266)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1266)

> Conflict with the natives began almost immediately, when the governor demanded that Powhatan stop his attacks on the English settlements and that the warriors who had recently killed four settlers be punished or handed over, together with all captives and stolen arms. He was careful to remind the paramount chief that he was a subject of King James. When Powhatan ignored the message and ordered the English to remain confined in Jamestown or be killed, and when a captured soldier was tortured to death before his companions’ eyes, conflict erupted and quickly escalated.9 DE LA WARR ORDERED Gates to take revenge on the Kecoughtans, which he did with guile and savagery.[(1272)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1272)

conflict with new colony and powhatn 

> To do this and to make profitable this wretched “parcell” of humanity, who had been snatched from “riotous, lasie [lazy] and infected places,” whose bodies were now so “diseased and ill used” by sea and climate as to “render them unhable, fainte, and desperate of recoverie,” they proceeded to devise a strict, quasi-military[(1346)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1346)

description of the workers with them 

> Gates, upon his arrival, published a prepared set of thirty-seven regulations covering everything from attendance at church to murder, blasphemy, sodomy, slander, rape, illegal trade, “disgraceful words,” unauthorized slaughter of animals, dumping of dirty laundry water and doing “the necessities of nature” close to the palisades, failing to keep houses and streets clean, running off to the Indians, failing to report to work “upon the beating of the drum,” robbing gardens, stealing laundry, failing to pay debts, and falsifying weights and measures. The penalties for violations were severe. In eighteen cases the punishment was death; in the others, whipping, tying together of head and heels, branding, loss of ears, and a familiar but seldom used punishment for incorrigibles, who thereby became “slaves”—service in the galleys. That in fact there were no galleys in the American coastal waters and few in England was beside the point. The severity of punishment extended to the limits of punitive imaginings, and the propriety of using English criminals, army deserters, rogues, and vagabonds as galley slaves had recently been reiterated in English law.16[(1348)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1348)

law code of gates 

compare to treatment of slaves. so not all English had rights 

> To Gates’s rules Dale, as provost, added fifty-one provisions of the martial law, regulating every conceivable aspect of a soldier’s life, violation of which in almost every case was to be punished by death. And Dale laid out in addition separate sets of detailed instructions for the behavior and duties of colonels, captains, ensigns, sergeants, corporals, and private soldiers. The whole compilation ended in an elaborate prayer to be delivered morning and evening by the captain of the watch or his deputy.17 The two together—Gates’s civil regulations and Dale’s drastic code of martial law—comprised the famous Laws Divine, Moral, and Martiall, which the company published in 1612. Though separated into the civil and military areas of life, in practice the Laws merged into a single body of draconian rules. Civilian settlers in this regime were to be, in effect, soldiers under military discipline; soldiers were to be workers—carpenters, sawyers, farmers, and fishermen—in the company’s common cause. This merging of soldiers and civilians and the use of degrading punishments were not unique. Martial law was used in other situations believed to be analogous to the settlement in Virginia—in England’s most violent borderlands, Ireland and the Welsh and Scottish marches. And in England itself severe, degrading punishments were commonly used to discipline the unfree, the servile, the base dependents who lacked full legal rights and survived on the benevolence of others. So, conceiving of Virginia’s “wretched and untoward people” as subject to the discipline of martial law and the familiar degradation of the unfree, it was no great leap for Dale to propose, as he did in a letter to Lord Salisbury, that the colony’s servile population be supplemented by a cohort of truly degraded people: convicts under sentence of death.18[(1357)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1357)

> Let the Crown, he wrote, send to Virginia all of England’s convicts awaiting execution, and let that be continued for three years. There would be nothing unusual in that. That was the way, he believed, the Spanish were peopling the Indies, and one need not fear the results. Convicts condemned to death were not always “the worst kinde of men” in terms of “birth, spiritts, or bodie.” And such reprieved convicts, unlike the present “crue” who grieved at being in Virginia, would welcome the chance to be there since they would be escaping with their lives, even though they had been justly condemned, and therefore would be happy “to make this their new countrie, and plant and inhabite herein with all diligence, cheerfullnes, and comfort.”19 His appeal, which, when renewed in later years by others in different circumstances, would produce remarkable results (fifty thousand convicts would eventually be shipped to America),[(1375)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1375)

> went unanswered. Gates[(1382)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1382)

> Laws, they organized Virginia’s population into companies “to be exercised and trayned up in martiall manner and warlike discipline.”[(1383)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1383)

> People were to be called to work by drumbeat, leave their work by drumbeat, be led to church by drumbeat, and after prayers and a meal, be summoned again by drumbeat to work until evening prayers. And they were to be punished for infractions as specified in the Laws. How consistently or fully these drastic rules were enforced we do not know, but Percy’s eyewitness account shows that Dale had no hesitation in putting some of the most severe of them into effect. A group of men, “idile and not willeinge to take paynes,” attempted to desert to the Indians. When caught, some were “apointed to be hanged, some burned, some to be broken upon wheles, others to be staked, and some to be shott to deathe. All theis extreme and crewell tortures [Dale] used and inflicted upon them to terrefy the reste for attempteinge the lyke.” And then, Percy grimly reported, there were those who robbed the supply store: Dale caused them “to be bownd faste unto trees and so sterved them to deathe.”20[(1384)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1384)

> But in their desperate struggles with the Indians the English came to fear that they might be descending into the debased state of their enemies. The fear of a decline into barbarism, as the savagery increased, haunted them, and the more thoughtful among them sought to alleviate their fears. They were not bloodthirsty brutes like the Spanish, whose barbarism they knew from recent translations of Bartolomé de Las Casas—avaricious, murdering looters butchering their way through peaceful civil societies. Even Dale, in the midst of his most punitive raids, felt the need to distinguish his English warriors from Spanish predators and to keep his people free from the charge of hypocrisy, which would “give cause of laughter to the Papists who desire their ruin.” However fierce their attacks, as humane Englishmen they were benefactors and parental guides to the benighted. Their aim was ultimately to bring these savage people out of darkness into light, to Christianize them for their[(1407)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1407)

moral justificstions 

> Force itself was not an evil, William Strachey, who witnessed the bloodshed of 1610–11, wrote in his Historie of Travell into Virginia Britania. A father is not barbarous if he beats his child “to bringe him to goodnes.” What would have happened to the people of Britain, he asked, people as savage in their origins as the bloody Picts, if the Romans had not violently forced upon them civilized ways? “We might yet have lyved overgrowne Satyrs, rude and untutred, wandring in the woodes, and dwelling in Caves, and hunting for our dynners … prostituting our daughters to straungers, sacrificing our Children to our Idolls.” So a civilizing end justified barbarous means.22 The need for some such rationale[(1414)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1414)

English had to justify the violence in terms of justice. Indians too? 

> quasi-governmental body similar to the East India Company eroded, while small private enterprises within the colony multiplied. The process of privatization on the English side would in the end dovetail with a major development in the colony itself. In 1614 the seven-year labor contracts of the initial settlers of 1607 came to an end. Freed from their obligations, some of the surviving workers immediately returned to England, but most remained and received from Dale small individual plots of land to be held as tenant farms. By 1615 there were said to be eighty-one such farms in the colony—as yet primitive clearings in the first, crude stages of cultivation—and the numbers were destined to grow as in successive years other laborers reached the end of their contracted terms. Since it was increasingly difficult for the company to finance further recruitment and emigration to the colony, the number of laborers working for[(1474)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1474)

> Virginia land per share for their personal, private development, with the prospect of more for future investments. At the same time independent planters in the colony would also receive fifty acres for having committed themselves personally to developing the colony. The policy quickly created its own dynamic. Shortly thereafter the company, seeking the maximum use of land for population growth, announced its willingness to grant fifty acres to every adventurer, resident or absentee, who transported an individual to the colony. In this way the “headright” system of land distribution, which would last for a century, came into being.25 At that point most of the elements of a system that would, within the next fifty years, account for the immigration to the Chesapeake lands of some seventy thousand people, had come together. What was still missing was a dynamic force in the form of a profitable commodity to drive the process forward. The first, failing experiments that had been made in growing[(1483)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1483)

> tobacco were not of the native, local plant known to the Indians but of a Spanish variety imported from Trinidad, for which a market was known to exist in Europe. Two years later John Rolfe’s efforts to produce the plant that grew natively in the Chesapeake region were beginning to look promising, though the quality of the tobacco shipped was still judged too poor for English consumption. It was, however, easily produced on partly cleared land, and the farmers, desperate for some kind of cash crop, persisted. The quality of the crop gradually improved, especially as a result of experiments carried on by experts sent to Bermuda, and production rose in every planting season. In 1616, a mere 1,250 pounds were shipped to England; in 1617, almost 10,000 pounds; in 1618, almost 25,000; in 1620, almost 60,000. In all, by 1621 over 100,000 pounds of Virginia[(1491)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1491)

> These large quantities of tobacco were not produced on the company’s land, and the laborers necessary to produce these crops were not, as originally planned, employees of the Virginia Company. They were contract workers, on an increasing number of “private plantations” created by the company’s new land policy, and tenant farmers of absentee landowners, assisted by indentured servants. By 1617 a model structure had emerged. Adventurers due land for their investments began to pool their grants to create larger and more efficient units of production. “Smith’s Hundred,” founded that year, which combined the land claims of leading figures in the company, became a virtual colonizing company of it own, financed by a terminable joint stock and complete with a private labor force of indentured servants and a[(1497)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1497)

## CHAPTER 4 Recruitment, Expansion, and Transformation 

> SIR EDWIN SANDYS, having taken control, realizing that the company faced bankruptcy and the colony itself ruin and annihilation, seized on initiatives undertaken by Smith and developed them into a comprehensive rescue campaign. He had first to convince the public at large that Virginia was not only a going concern but held enormous possibilities for the future. He had then somehow to settle the increasingly confused problem of land tenure in Virginia; get rid of Dale’s now notorious regime of martial law, yet maintain some discipline in the settlers’ lives; cut down on the colony’s growing reliance on tobacco; and force the farmers to diversify their production. Above all, most urgently and quickly, he had to find ways to increase the population— by enticements of all sorts, by coercion if necessary. 1

> As for management and the organization of public life, everything is now in order. Martial law has been eliminated, and the normal processes of English law and governance transferred to the colony. The land tenure system is regularized, with entitlements adjusted to length of service in the colony; indentured servants guaranteed half-profits during their term of service and fifty acres as freedom dues; and tradesmen promised a house and land for their contribution. Further, income from the company lands is being set aside to provide for the expenses of church, state, and education; a regular system exists for the creation of more private plantations, and the colonists are well on their way to building “publique guest houses for intertaining of new men upon their first arrivall.”2[(1530)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1530)

terms of indentured labor 

> available. The result was a further scattering of half-organized, socially inchoate clusters of strangers drawn disproportionately from certain segments of English society, seeking, in the crude, stump-filled tobacco farms of this subtropical lowland, to re-create a world they had known. The company’s coercive[(1561)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1561)

> “idle wastrels, petty thieves, and dissolute women,” at least 337 of its charges to be sent[(1566)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1566)

> petition of the company and drawing on its “superfluous multitude,” the city sent over to Virginia, at a cost to itself of £5 each, 99 children—75 boys and 24 “wenches”—between the ages of eight and sixteen, to serve as apprentices in the colony and to receive, in their maturity, fifty acres of land each.[(1570)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1570)

> By early January 1620 the city was even more active in the cause. It ordered the constables of all of the city’s wards to “walk the streets…[and] apprehend all such vagrant children, both boys and girls, as they shall find on the streets and in the markets or wandering in the night” and send them to Bridewell, with the clear implication that they were to be shipped to Virginia. And further, the aldermen were to instruct all churchwardens to visit the houses of the poor, to inquire whether these households were “overcharged and threatened with poor children,” and if so, to ask if they would agree to have these children, twelve years or older, sent to Virginia, thereby easing the families’ burdens and providing for the children’s[(1572)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1572)

> they “deny or refuse such order … they [will] receive no further relief from the parish wherein they inhabit.” There were other sanctions too.[(1578)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1578)

> was put down on order of no less a body than the king’s Privy Council, which authorized the city to imprison and punish those who remained “obstinate” in refusing to go to the colony.6[(1581)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1581)

> So it was that day after day, month after month, crowds of London’s vagrant children, “out of the multitudes that swarm there,” were collected, subjected to official punishment if they caused “any disorder,” jumbled together with assorted thieves, “nippers,” “lewd boy[s] that will not be ruled by [their] parents,” and miscellaneous servants, and distributed among the vessels headed for Virginia or the associated colony of Bermuda.[(1595)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1595)

> “You shall doe verie well,” George Thorpe wrote the company in 1621, to appoint qualified physicians and surgeons to screen the prospective servants “concerning the health and soundness of theire bodies.” Two of the boys assigned to labor for him on the college lands, he reported, were “soe diseased with olde solcers [ulcers] in their leggs … that I doe dispaire of theire abilitie to woorke.” One was close to death, another “broken-bellied [ruptured], a fourth … is maymed in one of his hands,” a fifth was “soe diseased in his who[le] body that he hath not bine able to help himself.” Many of the new recruits, both men and boys, he wrote, “have died in this countrey of incurable maladies that they brought with them.”8[(1599)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1599)

> Therefore “to tye and roote the planters myndes to Virginia by the bonds of wives and children,” a number of company investors contributed to a joint stock to subsidize the shipping of “young, handsome and honestlie educated maides … to be disposed in marriage to the most honest and industrious planters” willing and able to repay the investors the cost of the women’s passages. How “handsome and honestlie educated” the[(1638)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1638)

## CHAPTER 5 “A Flood, a Flood of Bloud”

> RACE RELATIONS HAD TAKEN a strange turn after the ambiguous “peace” of 1614. Powhatan’s personal dominance, essentially moderating if not conciliatory, quickly faded. Uncertain and confused in his relations with the English, he withdrew from the leadership of his people in 1617 and died the next year. His successor, his more belligerent, enterprising, and realistic brother Opechancanough, understood the mortal threat to the tidewater tribes that the expansion of English settlements implied. In 1618, the year that Sandys took over control of the company in London, he began planning for a coordinated attack, by all the tribes he could assemble, that would reassert the Powhatans’ control of the coastal region and with it their sense, if not of their superiority over the aggressive English, then of the autonomy they seemed to have lost. He did not intend to drive the English off the land, to exterminate them in genocidal warfare. The English were useful, if properly confined, kept within a careful balance of forces; the problem was how to confine them and thus reestablish the coherence of life that was being destroyed by English expansionism. His aim was to strike a single, devastating blow, a violent coup that would drive the English into a limited eastern enclave from which they might conduct their trade. The situation that developed between 1618 and 1622 was therefore paradoxical, for the company, under Sandys, was also developing a plan for future race relations— an ostensibly benevolent plan but one no less ethnocentric and no less dangerous to their opponents’ survival.

> Sandys, a son of the Archbishop of York, had taken holy orders at Oxford, and though a merchant and man of affairs, he never abandoned his religious commitment. Under his vigorous leadership, the elaborate plans for the development of the colony and the rationale for its promotion were cast increasingly in terms of rescuing the Indians from paganism and thereby converting them to European civility.[(1817)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1817)

> For such benevolent purposes, private donors were eager to contribute. An anonymous benefactor (“Dust and Ashes”) gave first £550 in gold for the conversion of the Indians and their subsequent apprenticeship in trade, then followed that with £450 for the company to send[(1835)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1835)

benevolent 

> Christian crusade, a holy war “leaving not a creature / that may restore such shame of man and nature” was justified in flaming sermons, pamphlets, essays, and poems, in which Thorpe’s martyrdom was a centerpiece.9[(1982)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=1982)

> a new generation of local leaders was emerging in Virginia. They were the first of the successful tobacco farmers and small-time Indian traders whose positions rested on their ability to wring material gain from the wilderness. Some, like Samuel Mathews, started with large initial advantages, but more typical were George Menefie and John Utie, who began as independent landowners by right of transporting themselves and only one or two servants. Abraham Wood, who would become famous for his explorations and, like Menefie and Utie, would possess a large estate and important offices, appears first as a servant boy on Mathews’s plantation. Adam Thoroughgood, the son of a country vicar, also started in Virginia as a servant, aged fourteen. William Spencer is first recorded as a yeoman farmer without servants. Such men as these—Spencer, Wood, Menefie, Utie, Mathews—were becoming the most important figures in Virginia at the end of the company period, engrossing large tracts of land and[(2102)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2102)

origin of second generation of leaders in va 

## CHAPTER 6 Terra-Maria

> IN THE GENERATION after the Virginia Company sent its first settlers to America, England and its relation to the western hemisphere were transformed. Though in the countryside England was still very much a traditional society, the regional growth of trade and industry and the accompanying expansion of the provincial towns, together with the extraordinary growth of London, were creating economic and social innovations throughout the land and stimulating mobility and a propensity to emigrate to a level that had not existed before. 

> Increasingly urban and mobile, modernizing in various sectors of life, its most progressive elements enterprising and ambitious, England was far from stable or secure. No one could have predicted the upheaval that would tear the country apart in the 1640s, but social and political strains were visible two decades earlier. Serious economic problems had developed—partly as a result of the volatility of the all-important textile industry, especially in East Anglia and the West Country, which in the 1620s fell into a depression, and partly because of falling wages, high food prices, and disasters like plague, fires, and failed[(2179)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2179)

internal migration 

> than any that lay behind the settlements in the western hemisphere. In the twelve years after 1630, 120,000 Englishmen and Scots are estimated to have migrated to Ireland, double the number of those who went to the West Indies in those years, six times more than went to New England.2 It was the beginning, in the British Isles,[(2210)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2210)

more immigrants going to Ireland than west Indies. populating ireland 

> To anyone willing to join the first settlement at his own expense and bring with him five able men, he offered a manor of two thousand acres with full judicial powers (“courts leet and baron”) and “all such royalties and privileges as are usually belonging to mannors in England,” and in addition ten acres of town land for each person transported in the capital city he planned.[(2343)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2343)

Calvert was trying to recreate manorial social structure 

> To study men, he wrote, “as God and nature made them, morally good,” people without the sins of “deceipt, pride, avarice, ambition, or (of all vices, the mother) sloth.” Besides satisfying “all manner of curiosities” and probing “unknowen secretts,” one would serve God nobly by contributing to the “conversion and civilizing [of] those barbarous heathens that live like beasts without the light of faith.” Maryland’s aim, as opposed to Virginia’s, was not “to extirpate and destroy” the natives (who he believed were “no lesse witty and discoursive” than Europeans) but “to civilize, cherish and preserve to eternity their manners, bodies, and soules.” Where can witt and worth be more truely[(2386)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2386)

a big weird idea... Euro exploration, just like the big weird ideas of the Indians written about earlier 

> It grieved his soul, he wrote, to hear England abused by those who complain of unemployment and can think of nothing else to do with themselves but in desperation to serve as mercenaries to foreign princes. “Shall the brave Englishman, the noble Brittain be the drudge to … those insulting strang[er]s (to whom he must crouch and fawne to gett his beggerly pay)”? England was “the garden of the earth … the flower of kingdomes for power and ma[jes]tie, the envy of countries for freeborne nurslings, the terror of nations for untamed spirits, the magazine of the world for trade and commerce.” And so, “peopling o[u]r new colonies [is]…more laudable in it selfe, more convenient for our country, and every way more worthy and becoming a true English heart then any forreine service.” By peopling Baltimore’s new colony, England’s sons could gain for themselves the name that so honored their ancient ancestors, “founders of a nation.”[(2396)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2396)

Great quote about the export of surplus people but colonies was a way of keeping them in England 

> And then, Wintour explained to his friend, there were the material rewards. In Maryland it would be possible to achieve “a quiett life sweetned with ease and plenty,” in secure possession of a “compotent estate … answerable to [one’s] birth and calling.” And he described in detail the good things of life that would in time become available in Maryland—all those benefits of life that people like himself should have had in England but didn’t: “ground of our owne … our owne beefe and mutton … venison out of our owne parke[,] a partridge, a pheasant, and a cock taken in o[u]r owne Mannor … with a good fire in the great chamber” attended by half a dozen “blew coates [servants]…to bring up our meate upon Sondaies.” And the gentleman settler would find “wholesome and fatt gardenage … a dainty river at his foote … delightfull walkes on every side … halfe a dozen or halfe a score gentlemen, his freinds and partners … to accompany him in his sports and consummate his felicity … nothing to doe but to be merry and grow fatt, eate, drinke, & recreate, and give God thanks.”[(2404)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2404)

and the material rewards: ground of our own 

> made up not, as elsewhere in the colonies, of “the scumme of the people, taken up promiscuously, as vagrants and runnewayes from their m[aste]rs, debauched, idle, lazie squanderers, jaylbirds, and the like,” but of decent fellow countrymen, tenants of known landowners, loyal servants happy to share in their masters’ fortunes, admitted to the colony only on “good recommenda[ti]ons and knowledge of them to be free from any taints.”[(2426)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2426)

Maryland not made up of the scrum like rest of colonies 

> local Piscataways and Patuxents desperate for defensive alliances against the aggressive Susquehannocks and Iroquois—[(2463)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2463)

example of alliance with English against other indians 

> They stopped along the way, however, at “Patomacke towne,” halfway up the river. There Father Altham delivered the first of the Jesuits’ sermons to the Indians, firmly informing the local chief of “his [religious] errours in part, which he seemed to acknowledge,” though, White had to admit, they did not really get far on religion, probably, he thought, because the interpreter was a Protestant. They finally reached the “Emperour” at Piscataway, eased his fears and those of his “500 bowmen,” convinced him of their good intentions, and extracted from him “leave to us to sett downe where we pleased.”21[(2484)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2484)

first contact by Calvert group with Indians. peaceful 

> estates. Giles, lord of the Fort Kent Manor, soon married (reputedly with an eye to future land grants) the daughter of the Piscataway “emperor,” who had been sent to live with the English at the age of seven. He would serve as acting governor at a critical time.[(2551)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2551)

> His sister, the spinster Margaret, would prove to be one of the most remarkable women of the era. Fiercely litigious in protecting her rights and unusually successful in innumerable lawsuits, she owned and managed properties throughout the colony and served as both executor of Governor Calvert’s estate and as Lord Baltimore’s attorney in the colony. In these capacities it fell to her to face the demands of Calvert’s soldiers for pay they had been denied. When the soldiers’ anger seemed to threaten the colony’s existence, she appeared at the Assembly with the remarkable demand that she be given two votes, one for herself and one as Lord Baltimore’s legal representative, hoping that with her influence the Assembly would vote the soldiers’ pay. But there were impassible limits, even on this chaotic frontier, to women’s public roles, and when her demand was rejected, she promptly sold off not only all of Leonard Calvert’s property to pay the soldiers but also the movable property of his brother, the absent proprietor, Lord Baltimore.[(2553)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2553)

Mary Giles woman with property and power 

> The official fur trade was only a limited success, and the manorial lords turned out to be, not social and juridical eminences presiding loftily over a stable, respectful population of tenants, but hustling, labor-poor tobacco planters and frontier land developers living in conditions not very different from that of the ordinary farmers.28[(2590)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2590)

even in Maryland no lofty lords. cuz there just wasn't much weslth 

> Probably the largest house in the 1630s was that of Lewger, built around 1638. It measured fifty-two by twenty feet and had a stone foundation and a central chimney that divided the house into two large rooms: a hall where meals were prepared and eaten and where all domestic activity took place; and a parlor for sleeping and more formal events. The[(2602)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2602)

largest house was smaller than yours and smaller than the pats that we now settle refugees in 

> they faced. St. Mary’s few hundred settlers can be traced back to villages in Gloucestershire, Kent, Essex, and Yorkshire, mingling with others from Newcastle, London, and Portugal. St. Michael’s inhabitants, even fewer in number, came from Cumberland, Norfolk, Devonshire, Northumberland, Lancashire, Buckinghamshire, Northamptonshire, and Ireland. Kent Island had people from London and fourteen English counties living together with Frenchmen, Irishmen, Welshmen, mulattoes, and (in very small numbers) blacks. While most of the settlers[(2663)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2663)

settlers from all over 

> By 1642 most of the original indentured servants, whose terms of service were limited to four or five years, had gained their freedom and were trying to establish themselves as independent farmers, claiming land of their own. A few, in these early years, made the transition to independence easily and successfully, some spectacularly. Thus Daniel Clocker, an illiterate seventeen-year-old son of Westmoreland miners, drifted into London where in 1636 he was taken up as one of Cornwallis’s indentured servants. Having survived his service in the colony, he used his freedom dues to buy an initial parcel of land, married one of Margaret Brent’s servants, raised five children, and prospered as a small householder and justice of the peace. He died possessed of movables worth £71 sterling and a freehold of 230 acres. More successful was Cuthbert Fenwick, also brought to Maryland as a servant by Thomas Cornwallis. Freed after four[(2681)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2681)

specific stories of indentureds mail good 

> Such successes were rare. For most, servitude and the transition to freedom and independence were struggles, profusely documented in the records of the first provincial court. As in Virginia, servants were bought and sold, pledged as security on debts, even risked in gambling—something, an observer noted, not done even by “Turk or Barbarian, and not becoming Christians.”[(2693)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2693)

but most didn't succeed like that. in fact they were close to slaves. gambled over! 

> and permanent labor force was inevitable. Within a decade there were signs of an interest in supplanting the free, transient labor force with involuntary permanent workers, but it would be many years before there would be an overwhelming demand for slaves, however defined, or the resources to purchase them in significant numbers, or a reliable system for importing them.39[(2717)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2717)

origin s of decision to startavery 

> Its population of some three to four hundred Europeans in 1642 was growing only slowly,[(2722)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2722)

num 

> Their benevolent and initially supportive ambitions created a potentially deadly contradiction in the colony’s goals and procedures.[(2730)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2730)

Jesuits in co tradiction 

> For four years he kept the Jesuits from venturing into the Indians’ lands, fearful of the eastward spread of diseases said to be afflicting the tribes, fearful even more of stirring up Indian attacks that might threaten the settlements, and hopeful that[(2748)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2748)

they knew they were killing with diseases 

> Piscataway. For that uneasy leader, suffering nightmares after murdering his brother in a struggle for dominance, had dreamed that White and Altham, whom he remembered from their exploratory visit of 1634, would bring him peace of mind. And in another dream he had seen White in the company of a beautiful god “surpassing the snow in whiteness,” in contrast to an image of “a most hideous demon” in company with the threatening Protestant trader Justinian Snow.[(2756)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2756)

dream led to emperors conversion 

> Such a conversion, reinforced by vivid tales of other miraculous interventions by the Holy Spirit in the Indians’ lives, proved to the Jesuits beyond any doubt that these Indians, though of all the people on earth the most “abject in appearance,” had souls “for which a ransom has been paid by Christ, and which are no less precious than those of the most cultivated Europeans.” Yes,[(2767)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2767)

value of Indians souls 

> bringing pagans to Christianity in this fleeting manner and with the “humble fare and hard couch”[(2791)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2791)

account of the few jesuits of Calvert colony show they did conversions. 

> “threatened the delicate balance that he sought between English and Catholic loyalties.”[(2811)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2811)

just a few Jesuits caused a ton of grief 

> Charges were brought against such depredations; repayment was demanded; and fencing—which violated the natives’ most elemental sense of the proper use of land—was demanded at the exposed borders. In 1638,[(2869)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2869)

conflicts over land and animals. same as whole world always 

> Random murders of isolated traders—Richard Thompson’s entire family, wife, child, and seven servants, living alone on Poplar Island, south of Kent, was wiped out—and demands for punishment further heightened tensions, which grew[(2873)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2873)

Indian random murders 

> Escaped to England, Claiborne lined up support from the victorious Parliamentary forces and their Puritan merchant supporters, thus aligning himself with the new, revolutionary establishment. Back in Virginia, he reestablished contact with his allies there, on Kent Island, and among the Susquehannocks. It was his influence, in all probability, that convinced that tribe in 1642 to launch a brief war against his Maryland enemies.54[(2895)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2895)

parliamentary revolutionary forces? 

> Calvert declared Susquehannocks, Wicocomocos, and Nanticokes official enemies of Maryland, banned all Indians from entering the colony’s territory, and authorized the settlers to shoot any Indians who entered the borders. Elaborate[(2904)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2904)

Indians declared enemies formally 

> Fifteen Maryland militiamen were captured, and tortured. They were dropped twice into a raging fire intensified by bear fat and pitch, a contemporary reported, then taken out, bound to flaming poles, and slowly roasted until a designated “devil chaser” tore the flesh from their faces, cut out their tongues, cut off their fingers and toes, which he threaded on strings for necklaces and knee bands, and finally tied them to burning bundles of reeds while boys “with a great noise” shot arrows into their smoldering bodies.55 The fighting continued,[(2910)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2910)

Indian torture of captured militia 

> Though Cornwallis had been his business partner and friend, Ingle looted the house of everything of value, down to the hardware on the doors and windows, reducing it to “a most pitifull ruines, spoiled and defaced,” which he used as a warehouse for his plundered goods and a holding station for captured Catholics. (Cornwallis would later value the loss and damage at £2,623.)[(2957)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2957)

example of the division and violence in civil war in America. friend against.st friend in opportunistic grabs 

> His main goal had been to make a killing in trade, licit or illicit, and to profit from the political upheaval. So he was selective in his raids in Maryland, targeting Catholics and anyone he could describe as a royalist. As a result the damage in the colony went deeper than simply the loss of property and social disorder. The raids gave expression to the resentments of indentured servants, debtors, and tenants seeking independence from manorial landowners; they weakened the authority of the manor lords; and they threw the legitimacy of Baltimore’s proprietorship into question.[(2971)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2971)

Great example of chaos of rebellion and how opportunists and real grievances combine 

> Baltimore’s charter. There, first in the admiralty courts, then in the civil courts, Ingle’s fortunes were thrown into confusion. His claims for the ownership of the property he had looted were met by effective counterclaims, his petitions by counterpetitions. Nothing worked in his favor. The Dutch ship was returned to its owners; his prisoners were freed (though Father White languished in prison for a time); his loot was declared illegal; and he ended up defending himself against the Catholics’ countersuits. At[(2976)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2976)

example of English law working 

> That document was radical in the context of the time since it protected “conscience in matters of religion” and the free right to worship, and urged people of differing confessions to live together in peace under the same government and avoid using inflammatory terms like “heritick, scismatick, idolator, puritan,…prespiterian, popish prest,…jesuited papist, Lutheran, Calvenist, anabaptist, brownist … sepa[ra]tist, or any other.”[(2996)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=2996)

groundbreaking declaration on religious freedom. and great example of timeless "political correctness 

> “scumme of the people … vagrants and runnewayes … debauched, idle, lazie squanderers, jaylbirds, and the like”—precisely those Wintour had so feared and condemned.[(3058)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3058)

## CHAPTER 7 The Chesapeake’s New World

> WELL BEFORE 1660, when Lord Baltimore had recovered full possession of his proprietary colony and when the most tumultuous conflicts in that colony had subsided, a pattern of life had begun to emerge throughout the Chesapeake lands different from what had been known before, far different from what the original sponsors had hoped for and designed. The most powerful propulsions were created by the knowledge, spreading throughout the British archipelago, that after all the barbarism of the initial settlements, planters— even small and middle-level planters— in the Chesapeake region were beginning to pile profit upon profit by growing tobacco; that there, and throughout the North American coastal region, land was available for private ownership and cultivation; and that the value of the land, even undeveloped land, was rising as settlement expanded. The result was rapid population growth. 

> In the late 1640s and the years that followed, newcomers arrived by the hundreds, then by the thousands— eight to nine thousand per decade in the 1630s and 1640s. Prominent among them, attracted by the region’s widely publicized profitability, were free, independent migrants who arrived with family, one or two servants, and some small savings. They came from slightly higher levels of society than most of the indentees and were more likely to have skills, useful connections, and some small capital to rebuild their lives. Some had social pretensions. Of a sample of over four hundred such free émigrés, almost a third claimed gentry status, and 27 percent claimed to be “merchants” of one sort or another. But these were not equivalents to the aristocrats and gentry of the earliest years of settlement, for whom Virginia had been a scientific curiosity and its founding an adventure or a patriotic challenge to the claims of rival powers. These free, uncommitted emigrants, outnumbered by indentured servants by three or four to one, were impelled by the same search for security as were the servants. They too were willing to risk resettlement and labor in the tobacco world to avoid material and social decline.1[(3073)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3073)

sample of settlers in 1660s one third were gentry but low gentry 

> They took what they could as soon as they could and in any way they could, acting, as Karen Kupperman has remarked of their predecessors, “with barbarity toward those who were powerless, whether they were Indians, Africans, or fellow Europeans.”3[(3093)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3093)

quote about lisentiousness toward powerless 

> By midcentury, notices of labor needs in the Chesapeake colonies as in the West Indies appeared everywhere in England’s major port towns and the surrounding clusters of villages—posted in taverns, hawked at hiring fairs, and advertised widely by recruiters sent out through the countryside by merchants with investments in the colonies. Enticements were offered and loudly publicized: familial care, protection, and at least the prospect of land of one’s own when one’s bondage was completed.5[(3108)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3108)

the pitch and how it was delivered in England for laborers in america 

> But propulsion was more important than enticement. With England’s population growing steadily through the first half of the century (from 4.1 million to 5.3 million in those fifty years), real wages declining, periodic depressions disrupting key industries, and political upheavals unsettling development plans of all kinds, tens of thousands of unskilled laborers and insecure tradesmen and craftsmen faced unemployment and its consequences. Wandering from village to village and from farms to towns in search of employment, they intensified the population’s usual mobility, and in desperation many, fearing vagrancy and destitution, chose the risks of an overseas voyage and labor in strange circumstances. Approximately one hundred thousand Britons, the great majority English, are known to have migrated to the tobacco coast in the seventeenth century. At least 70 percent of them and probably 85 percent came as indentured servants. Bonded for service, they were at work in the oldest settled areas as in the newest, arriving year after year on veritable convoys of ships from the major English ports. Middlesex County, between the Potomac and the Rappahannock rivers, a contemporary wrote, was a “sea of servants”—45 percent of that county’s entire population were servants in 1668—and the same could have been said of other counties.6[(3112)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3112)

the push effect in migration. landless people. 80% came as indentured 

> The most debased, possibly 40 percent of the total, were the youngest, the least skilled and most destitute; they shipped out without the protection of legal indentures and served therefore according to the harsh terms of extemporized contracts that[(3136)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3136)

those below indentureds 

> be utterly destitute vagrants picked up by recruiting agents at “beggars’ fairs,”[(3140)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3140)

> seizures of men and boys—occasionally women as well—for forced shipment to the colonies, where their services were offered for sale. It was a brutal traffic, described in vivid accounts by victims and in court records. What had been occasional in the Virginia Company’s earliest years had developed into an organized system with safe houses for confining victims until shipping could be arranged and with standardized transaction costs and procedures. Week after week, month after month,[(3145)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3145)

and trafficking 

> In 1665 a Scottish minister in Virginia reported that his countrymen in the colony were “living better than ever ther forfathers, and that from so mean a beginning as being sold [as] slav[e]s here, after … Worster fight are now herein great masters of many servants themselfs.”9[(3169)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3169)

how bountiful America could be even for indentureds 

> Once debarked at the small Chesapeake ports and riverside inlets on the mainland, the incoming servants found themselves transformed into commodities—commoditized units of labor. If their service was not already committed, they—their services—were sold to the highest bidder. Most of the uncommitted were disposed of in shipboard and dockside transactions, the length of their labor determined by the terms of sale. Those who were not sold on shipboard were peddled through the countryside for sale in small numbers or individually to inland farmers, many of whom had themselves only recently been freed and were struggling to produce enough tobacco to buy a sufficient stake in the land.12[(3192)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3192)

how the uncommitted were sold off 

> Between 15 and 30 percent of male immigrants to Maryland at midcentury died within the first, “seasoning” year of their residence, and those who were alive at age twentytwo could expect to live only another twenty-three years. In one county 17 percent of the immigrant males who were alive at age twenty-two died before thirty, 41 percent by age forty, 70 percent by age fifty. In Middlesex County, Virginia, “only a minority lived to the end of their service and joined the ranks of the free.”[(3200)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3200)

15 to 30 pct died in first year 

> death. In Charles County, Maryland, marriages lasted on average only nine years before one partner died. In Virginia most children lost at least one parent by the time they reached majority; over a third lost both. In Middlesex County a quarter of all children lost one or both parents before age five; half did so by age thirteen; and almost three-quarters by age twenty-one or by the time of marriage. Old people were rare. Few children ever knew their grandparents, and orphanage was common. Thirty percent of all children were orphans before their eighteenth birthday and were left in the care of uncles, family friends, legal guardians, godparents, and above all stepparents.[(3212)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3212)

stats on death 

> orphans, half-brothers, stepbrothers and stepsisters, and wards running a gamut of ages. The father figure in the house might well be an uncle or a brother, the mother figure an aunt, elder sister, or simply the father’s “now-wife”—to use the wording frequently found in conveyances and wills.[(3221)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3221)

description of typical confusing family 

> Agatha Vause: by her tenth birthday, she had lost a father, two stepfathers, a mother, and a guardian uncle.[(3225)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3225)

> Living conditions contributed to the brutality of life and the savage death rate. Houses on the small plantations in Maryland as in Virginia continued to be drafty wooden boxes, “dribbled over the landscape without apparent design.” As in earlier years most houses consisted of a single room or at best two rooms with a loft above. Floors were usually beaten earth, the walls made of raw unpainted planks thinly chinked with clay. Normal furnishings were rolled-up mattresses for beds (bedsteads were rare), a bench and a table, a few chests for storage, and pewter and wooden dishes. Spoons and one’s fingers were the only utensils for eating. There were no privies, and even chamber pots were rare. People relieved themselves outside, close to the walls, “creating stenches that must have pervaded all rooms of the house.” Clothing hung from the walls or was stretched out as a space divider. The small flimsy buildings were cold in winter and hot and insect-ridden in summer; with shuttered windows, they were always dark. Above all, as the family’s central place for meals, sleeping, procreation, care for the sick, and entertainment, they were crowded. Two persons per bed was the average for Maryland’s ordinary families, and in this as in so many other aspects of daily life, there were few differences between servants and masters.[(3229)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3229)

good living conditions description 

> a wife, husband, two children, and perhaps a servant are gathered together in the perpetual dusk of their shuttered cottage … their dinner is cornmeal mush boiled in an iron pot. The food is ladled into five plates or porringers, one for each person. The father sets his down on a large storage trunk which he straddles and sits on. His daughter is perched on the edge of a small chest, the only other piece of furniture in the room. The rest either stand or squat along the walls. They spoon up the food from the plates they must hold in their hands or place on the floor. They drink milk or water from a common cup, tankard or bowl passed around. No candle or lamp is lighted now or later when the room grows completely dark except for the glow of embers on the hearth.… While someone rinses the bowls in a bucket of water (there being only one pot) someone else drags out a cattail mattress and arranges it in front of the fire. The husband, wife, and daughter lie down there, covering themselves with a single canvas sheet and a worn-out bed rug. The son and servant roll up in blankets on the floor. For warmth all sleep in their clothes.[(3244)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3244)

another great description of living by archeologists 

> Women who bore illegitimate children, like those who attempted escapes and forceful resistance, were punished most commonly by extensions of service and so to still further exploitation.16[(3262)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3262)

> Such discouraging prospects, relayed back to England by returnees and correspondents, were in themselves enough to reduce the flow of new recruits to the North American servant population. By the 1670s the decline in their numbers within increasing flows of immigrants to the region was palpable. By the 1680s it was a major problem for the established planters. Their ultimate solution, slow in coming at first but reaching fulfillment at the end of the century, was the substitution of African slaves for the familiar British and European servants—people utterly alien to the planters, of perplexing character, and believed to be barbarous by nature.18[(3275)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3275)

the switch to slavery 

> By 1650 there were 300 blacks in Maryland; in 1660, 758; and in 1670, 1,190 (9 percent of the population),[(3288)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3288)

num 

> Some came as freemen and remained free, though often under particular disabilities. Others could show by oral or written testimony that their service was contractually limited to a specific term, after which, like indentured servants, they were to be released.19 And a very few, who came bound in service, through ceaseless labor and fierce determination were able to buy their freedom and that of their families and establish themselves in the society at large. In 1668 nearly a third of the fifty-nine blacks in Northampton County on Virginia’s lower Eastern Shore, all of whom had arrived bound in unlimited servitude, had acquired freedom; some had bought property which they were able to pass on to the next generation, established effective community ties among themselves, and participated broadly in the larger white society. All blacks before 1660, Edmund Morgan writes, “whether servant, slave, or free, enjoyed most of the same rights and duties of other Virginians. There is no evidence … that they were subjected to a more severe discipline than other servants.”20[(3295)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3295)

Africans were more like indentureds in beginning 

> servants. Lacking contracts, actual or implicit, and having been bought or seized in Africa or abroad, they were considered to be bound in servitude for life unless otherwise identified, a condition never imposed on whites but that seemed suitable in most Europeans’ eyes. For they were black, and color mattered. It carried with it a plethora of cultural assumptions. To be black in north European culture, and especially in Elizabethan and Jacobean England, was to be dark in a cultural sense—base, sinister, inferior, “grossly uncivil … unscrupulous, thieving, and sometimes treacherous.”21[(3307)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3307)

lifetime service by default 

> As the economic value of servants without limit of time grew in the labor-short plantations and as white indentured servants became less available, the term slave—the word itself—acquired a salience it had not had before and, gradually, a new specific, legal meaning that would render the use of the word “scandalous,” a contemporary wrote, if it were to be applied to white servants. Something new and vital, a newly defined legal category, began to emerge, out of the difficulties of the labor situation, out of experience in plantation agriculture, out of necessity, and out of a sense of racial differences.22[(3315)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3315)

> There had been no preexisting legal definition of slavery, and no one set out to infuse the term with a new, specific meaning. But as the blacks’ importance in the labor force grew, disputes arose over the terms of servitude which could only be resolved through litigation, despite the lack of legal precedents. Laws to resolve the conflicts and confine the blacks to maximum exploitation had to be devised. Analogies were useless. Kidnapped boys who, like Africans, arrived without work contracts were bound simply by “the custom of the country” which however harsh allowed for eventual release. Few thought the same should apply to blacks, or that a limited contract of some sort was implied where bondage was unspecified. If slavery meant lifelong servitude, as in fact it most often did, was that status heritable? Did it carry over to the slaves’ offspring? Were marriages between whites and blacks, free and unfree, Europeans and Africans, legal? If so, were the children of such unions white or black in the eyes of the law? Did conversion to Christianity release one from bondage? Answers had to be found if the planters’ economy was to prosper. What began as conditions de facto became statuses de jure, as the planters, merchants, and lawyers sought to remedy discrepancies, resolve ambiguities, and bind into an effective and reliable labor force the growing mass of black workers. There were some working models, if not legal precedents, that might in some degree be followed. Blacks had been enslaved in the Caribbean islands before the Chesapeake authorities began searching for legal definitions, and slave laws had been passed there, especially in Barbados, that were known in Virginia. So to some extent, as April Hatfield has suggested, the emerging legalities of slavery developed as an intercolonial “conversation.” But the Barbadian laws and practices did not cover all contingencies or fit closely the more complex economy of the Chesapeake.23[(3320)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3320)

defining legal status of slaves 

## CHAPTER 8 The Dutch Farrago 1 

> IF THE SCATTERED POPULATION on the upper Chesapeake was in many ways discordant and conflicted to the point of bloodshed, it was in a very general sense ethnically unified. Though various Europeans— Poles, Germans, French, Dutch— were brought over to Virginia and Maryland for specialized work, the great majority of the Chesapeake settlers were English in origin. But while these English— diverse regionally, occupationally, and socially; Catholics and Protestants, Jesuits and Puritans— struggled to establish some kind of order and stability in their lives and made awkward, often hostile contact with the American natives, a hundred miles to the northeast a far more heterogeneous, polylinguistic population was gathering. There, on both sides of the Delaware River and on the shores of the lower Hudson, in small numbers, Dutch, Finns, Swedes, Walloons, Flemings, Frisians, Holsteiners, Danes, Germans, and French Huguenots were settling in crude, temporary encampments, isolated trading posts, and primitive farms financed mainly by Dutch entre-preneurs involved in the far-flung effort to exploit the riches of the western hemisphere in competition with the Spanish, Portuguese, and English.

> Though only recently freed from Spanish rule, the Dutch republic was already famous for its toleration, despite its formal church establishment, and for the opportunities it offered for entrepreneurial enterprise and high wages. To[(3607)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3607)

netherlands 

> Among these refugees migrating north to the Netherlands from Flanders, Antwerp, Brabant, and Hainault were expert textile workers, ambitious entrepreneurs, and cultural leaders who would contribute to the “golden age” of Dutch cultural history. They were joined by Jews and crypto-Jews fleeing persecution in Spain and Portugal, as well as by Polish Socinians, Czech Comenians, Swiss and Prussian Baptists, and English radical separatists. In the early seventeenth century, 40 percent of the people in Amsterdam who registered for marriage were foreign born—most of them from the western German states. Of that city’s 685 wealthiest citizens, 160 were Flemish or Walloon in origin, 30 were German, and there were Italian, English, and Scandinavians among them as well.1[(3611)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=3611)

amazing amsterdam 

## CHAPTER 9 Carnage and Civility in a Developing Hub of Commerce 

> THOUGH VAN DER DONCK had been suppressed and Herrman had been co-opted and then diverted by Baltimore and Maryland, and though the commonalty had in part been pacified by the grant of a municipal government for New Amsterdam, Stuyvesant had not solved New Netherland’s problems. Conflict continued. Contention followed all of Stuyvesant’s efforts at reform. Population recruitment remained the colony’s most urgent problem, and proposals continued to be made to solve it. In 1648, the year after Stuyvesant’s arrival, the colony’s audit board suggested that slaves might be the key to the colony’s population problem. Under the terms of their scheme, settlers who actually promoted farming and population growth in the colony would be allowed to export farm products in their own vessels directly to Dutch colonial markets, such as Brazil, and to return with shiploads of slaves. In this way Brazil and other Dutch colonies would get cheap produce and New Netherland 

> "would by slave labor be more extensively cultivated than it has hitherto been, because the [free] agricultural laborers who are conveyed thither at great expense to the colonists sooner or later apply themselves to trade and neglect agriculture altogether. Slaves, on the other hand, being brought and maintained there at a cheap rate, various other descriptions of produce would be raised and by their abundance be reduced in price so as to allow  …   their advantageous exportation [to the Netherlands] and to other parts of Europe." 

> Two years later came the commonalty’s urgent plea in its Remonstrance, that the government subsidize the free emigration of the Netherlands’ surplus population, “farmers and laborers with other people in straitened circumstances.” And indeed Van der Donck’s personal efforts while in the Netherlands led to a small surge in emigration to the colony. 1
(4529)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=4529)

> Ordinary constraints were abandoned when several hundred Indians—four hundred settled in the area in 1659—some with wives and children, docked as many as 190 canoes along the town’s river bank. To shelter these suppliers, some traders built sheds on their own property, some threw together barracks; others simply took the Indians into their homes, bedding them down where space permitted, even if, as one host wrote, one’s guests were “a party of drunken savages.”[(4672)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=4672)

closeness 

> They were relentless, irrepressible, passionate. One of their leaders, Robert Hodgson, was arrested in an orchard where he was preparing to preach and was confined in a nearby house. When he managed still to harangue the crowd through an open window, he was dragged off to New Amsterdam. There he was thrown into a “dungeon full of vermin and so odious for wet and dirt as he never saw before” and sentenced to a large fine and two years’ hard labor. That stiffened his defiance. When he refused to work he was beaten with a tarred rope and chained to a wheelbarrow. When he still preached to anyone within earshot, he was hung from the ceiling by his hands and whipped repeatedly. If Stuyvesant thought this would discourage other radicals, he was wrong. His strategy failed, as did his orders prohibiting all ships from bringing Quakers into the province and fining anyone who harbored them.[(4787)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=4787)

styu punishes quakers 

> He was therefore told to “shut [his] eyes, at least not force people’s consciences but allow every one to have his own belief, as long as he behaves quietly and legally, gives no offence to his neighbors, and does not oppose the government.” The city of Amsterdam, they wrote, had always acted in that fashion, and so it “has often had a considerable influx of people.” So might New Netherland if the same toleration prevailed there.17[(4807)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=4807)

Dutch company tells Stuyvesant to shut up 

> But their role in New Netherland’s society was entirely different from what it was in the plantation south. They were treated as bondsmen in various degrees of servitude that tended to shift toward freedom. They had legal rights little different from those enjoyed by free whites. They could give testimony in court, against whites as well as blacks, they had the right to trial, they could own movable property and be married in Christian churches, and they were paid for work done in spare time. In general they were “entitled to regular civil and criminal jurisprudence and were treated fairly, and at times with lenience.” A number of those who believed they had the right to freedom for long-term faithful service were in fact freed. The company’s manumission in 1644 of eleven of its slaves and their wives was recorded as due them for eighteen or nineteen years of service. “Half-freedom” was common. It was an arrangement in which the slave, but not necessarily his children, was granted full personal liberty (certified by a pass stating the bearer to be free “as other free people”) in return for an annual grant to the company and an obligation to provide service when required. This spared the company the expense of maintaining the slaves and their families while providing a reliable workforce that could be summoned at will. Some slaves were “rented out,” the profits of their labor shared with their owners. By 1664, when around 10 percent of the colony’s population was black, the domestics among them and some of the artisans were beginning to be housed in their owners’ homes—in lofts, attics, sheds, cellars, and spare corners of the kitchens. Slaves not being uniquely necessary for the economy, there was no incentive to encourage their increase. In time, as the urban areas became more crowded, children born of slaves would become undesirable. Some Manhattan slave owners would sell their female slaves as soon as it was known that they were pregnant.21[(4841)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=4841)

slavery in Dutch colonies 

> The company hardly played any role in the colony’s shipping boom in the 1650s and early 1660s. New Netherland’s trade was in the hands of Manhattan’s private entrepreneurs, acting most effectively as agents or associates of commercial syndicates in Holland that were driving hard, through the far-flung circuits of Atlantic trade, to reach new markets in the west and overseas sources of goods salable in Europe.[(4929)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=4929)

## CHAPTER 10 Swedes, Finns, and the Passion of Pieter Plockhoy 

> BY 1664, when the English conquered New Netherland, that colony was no longer simply a Dutch outpost with a complex population of north Germanic peoples. Nine years earlier it had absorbed the colony of New Sweden, a scattering of settlements on the banks of the Delaware River some hundred miles to the south. New Sweden’s woodland farms, its rough log huts and dilapidated forts and trading posts housed not only Swedes but a fringe population drawn from Sweden’s multi-ethnic Baltic empire and from the Netherlands, England, and the north German states. The most distinctive group were Finns—forest folk, whose cultural and geographical origins lay close to Lake Ladoga near the Russian border—the heartland of Savo-Karelia—and to Lappland in the north. Their way of life was peculiarly primitive by western European standards, and they proved to have a greater affinity to the culture of the native Americans than did any other Europeans in North America. It was they who would initiate a “frontier” style of life that would spread across the continental borderlands for generations to come.1[(5150)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=5150)

Finns the pioneers 

> low, three-sided huts barely large enough for two or three people to huddle in; they could be mistaken for animal dens. For permanent residence, they built one- or two-room log cabins which served as living quarters, saunas, and farm sheds. These were not fine works of rural craftsmanship; the walls were made of whole logs notched together at the corners, the chinks sealed with smears of clay or moss. As these small, bare, dark log buildings multiplied and were surrounded by animal pens, bathhouses, and haybarns, they formed not coherent villages but sprawls of habitations randomly spread across the landscape. The folkways of these forest Finns evoked the lives of the mythical Kalevalans whom their bardic singers had immemorially celebrated: free-spirited, boisterous, alcohol-guzzling, party-loving backwoods folk, capable of prodigious feats, bravery, foolhardiness, violence, and sundry foul deeds. Witches, wizards, and charms abound in a setting only dimly Christianized. Central authority and law rarely enter the epic.[(5572)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=5572)

how the Finns lived 

> The Swedes adopted the burn-beating form of agriculture, and Finns and Swedes alike took on a “savage” appearance: for later observers, they “are like one people.” When clothes wore out, they could not be replaced. There were reports that the soldiers were making shirts from sailcloth or simply going without shirts. More commonly the settlers reverted to the Savo-Karelian tradition, now neatly fused with the native Indians’ practice, of wearing clothes made of animal skins. “Savage coats” of buckskin became common, as did elkskin trousers. Women adopted skirts and shirts of deerskin; both men and women began wearing clothes made of sheepskins from which the fleece had not been sheared; and blankets and bedcovers were made from the hides of bears and wolves. By the time Risingh began his revival of the colony, clothes made of animal skins had almost entirely replaced those of woven cloth. And for many, moccasins, stitched together from tanned deerskins—as familiar to the Saamis as to the Lenapes—and birch-bark shoes familiar to Finnish peasants, had replaced heeled shoes. In other ways too there was a convergence between the lifestyles of the colonists and the Indians. The Finns adopted Indian corn mush thickened with meat as a staple food and used Indian herbal remedies. The Lenapes’ animism, the spirit world that enclosed them, their reliance on guardian spirits, their shamanistic religion, their belief in the reality of dreams, their nomadism and hunting culture—all this was remarkably similar to the Saamis’ world that the Finns knew well; they could easily relate to it. Miscegenation, though not intermarriage, came easily to them, and when children were exchanged for language learning, the Europeans much more often than the Lenapes resisted the return to their homes. Conversely, as the Europeans increasingly adopted Indian ways,[(5645)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=5645)

European kids didn't want to go back when exchanged for language learning g 

> 
how Europeans adopted Indian ways 

> Every adult male would have to pledge never to “strive for any special power” and never quarrel over religion; and “the weaker members will always be protected as much as possible from oppression by the stronger ones.” Laws would be enacted by two-thirds majority of votes of the people cast in ballots and enforced by a single popularly elected magistrate distinguished for “means, intelligence, and knowledge.” The number of public servants, all of them accountable to the public, would increase only with the growth of the population. Mennonites were to be exempted from military service and from voting on military matters. People were to work together, in common, for the public good, for five years, laboring for no more than six hours daily. After that period the land and other property would be divided into parcels of private ownership by lot.59 This would be a welfare society: the sick, rich or poor, would have public health care; “all impotent men, women, and children”—the needy, orphans, sick, and old—would be looked after by the public. Youths would be counseled on marriage, and all quarrels, however personal, would be submitted to public servants for resolution. Troublemakers—stubborn slanderers and unruly quarrelers and such false believers as “obstinate papists…, parasitic Jews, Anglican headstrong Quakers and Puritans, and rash and stupid believers in the millenium…[and] present-day pretenders to revelation”—all these, who would threaten the basic toleration and rationality, would be counseled, and if necessary expelled by legal process. And well-disposed people who lived nearby, outside the community, would be treated with kindness so that they might be “saved from becoming degraded, and will become instead worthwhile members of our society.”60[(5916)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=5916)

utopian society of someswede 

> What did he mean by equality? Did he mean to abolish all differences among people—to level the whole society? For people familiar with the threatening claims of the Levellers, the Fifth Monarchy Men, the Diggers, and assorted radical agitators and for whom the memories of late medieval peasant rebellions were still fresh, this was an overwhelmingly important question, which Plockhoy struggled to answer. Equality, he insisted, was indeed to be the basis of his new society, but “we hope nobody will be so naive, much less malevolent, as to think … that we are attempting to remove all differences between people.” Each[(5935)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=5935)

what did levelers mean by equality? 

## CHAPTER 11 God’s Conventicle, Bradford’s Lamentation 

> THERE ARE STRIKING SIMILARITIES between Plockhoy’s settlement at Whorekill on the Delaware and the Pilgrims’ village at Plymouth on the south shore of Massachusetts. Both had Anglo-Dutch origins; both were deliberate and complete removals from a corrupt metropolitan world; both were designed as communes of equal sharing in the initial years; both were convinced that they were the preservers, the protectors and promoters, of pristine Christianity; and in the end both were overtaken by forces they could not control, their people melding into a diverse population whose distinctive folkways had not yet formed. 

> There were differences too. Plockhoy, born the year of the Pilgrims’ settlement in America, was critical but tolerant of diversity within the Protestant confessions; the Pilgrim leaders feared toleration, which they correctly saw would destroy their entire project, both church and sanctified society. 1 Plockhoy saw benefits in business enterprise; the Pilgrims feared its corrosive effect. Plockhoy’s program was elaborately articulated, the product of an intricate system of radical ideas expressed in enumerated rules and precepts; the Pilgrims lived in loose agreement on what they took to be the true and simple principles of primitive Christianity and apostolic purity. Plockhoy’s utopia ended in a sudden, fiery death that was barely recorded and entirely unlamented; the Pilgrims’ utopia faded gradually, its demise documented in lamentations that would become classic texts in elegiac prose. But however different, both were products of the great churnings and burnings in radical Protestantism that account for population displacements throughout the Atlantic world.

> concluded that life was intolerable in England under what Bradford called the scoffing and scorn of the profane multitude and “the lordly and tyrannous power of the prelates” demanding conformity, they had become a company of about 125 souls. Depressed by recurrent waves of economic[(6054)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6054)

pilgrims deciding to leave 

> temptations of the enterprising world about them were pervasive, as was the tendency of their children to join in the pastimes and group life of the Dutch and be “drawn away by evil examples into extravagant and dangerous courses” as soldiers, sailors, or casual sinners. Increasingly it seemed[(6084)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6084)

> “those vast and unpeopled countries of America … where there are only savage and brutish men which range up and down, little otherwise than the wild beasts of the same”?[(6100)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6100)

> “unconceivable perils and dangers,” and they[(6102)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6102)

> (“famine and nakedness and the want … of all things”). And there was always the continual danger of the savage people, who are cruel, barbarous and most treacherous … not being content only to kill and take away life, but delight to torment men in the most bloody manner … flaying some alive … cutting off the members and joints … and broiling on the coals, eat[ing] the collops of their flesh in their sight whilst they live, with other cruelties horrible to be related.[(6103)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6103)

> condition.” And the future in the Netherlands was darkened even more by the prospect of the resumption of warfare with the Spanish, who “might prove as cruel as the savages of America, and the famine and pestilence as sore here as there, and their liberty less to look out for remedy.”[(6112)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6112)

> Families had divided. The Brewsters left three of their children behind, the Bradfords their five-year-old son, and at least eight of the men departed from their wives, hoping someday to be reunited.[(6141)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6141)

> “One of the profanest families,” Bradford would later recall, was the Billingtons, originally from Lincolnshire. The father, John, was trouble from the start; the son Francis, age eight in 1620, almost blew up the Mayflower when he fired a gun into a barrel of gunpowder in the main cabin; and John’s wife, Eleanor, would be sentenced to time in the stocks and a whipping for slander.[(6175)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6175)

> was John Alden, the “hopefull” twenty-one-year-old cooper, hired in Southampton for purely economic reasons; in his sixty-seven years in the colony, he would prove to be not only faithful to the Leideners’ creed but one of the most rigorous in enforcing it.[(6190)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6190)

was not of the church but was important leader in it. so to miles standish 

> “just and equal laws, ordinances, acts, constitutions and offices” that would be promulgated[(6257)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6257)

rule of law right from start 

> Their struggle to maintain their identity and realize their hopes in this increasingly complex demographic situation was fierce, unending, and in the end unsuccessful. For a while, however, they seemed victorious. They could accommodate the sixty-seven “rough and unruly” men whom Thomas Weston sent over in 1622. For as expected, Weston’s “rude fellows,” led by his “heady … and violent” brother, moved off, after three months, to Wessagusset (Weymouth), thirty miles to the north, to establish a fishing station and trading post. Plymouth had been warned that these “are no men for us,” indeed that they were “not fit for an honest man’s company.” In[(6348)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6348)

inundated by strangers constantly 

> “Methinks one or two principals should have been full enough, according to that approved rule, the punishment to the few, and the fear to many.” “To be a terror to poor, barbarous people” might seem “glorious” in men’s eyes, but not in God’s. And quite aside from the morality and legality involved, Robinson concluded, such behavior might well stimulate others to begin a “ruffling course in the world” to everyone’s disadvantage.22[(6372)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6372)

Leyden wanted mercy 

> “began to fall into some strange opinions, and from opinion to practice, which caused some controversy between the church and him.” Whether it was his insistence on the separation of church and state that caused the rift, or his publicized argument that the English had no right to seize the Indians’ land, or his belief in absolute religious toleration—none of which the Pilgrims could accept—is not known. All these ideas, formulated with great acuity, probably played a role. Even so, some felt that compromises might be made to retain his services, until Brewster, fearful that Williams’s views would splinter the fragile consensus that bound the community and that his ideas were heading toward the radical Anabaptism that twenty-five years earlier had split the church in Amsterdam, advised against his remaining.35[(6582)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6582)

preacher who questioned taking Indian land 

## CHAPTER 12 The New-English Sionists: Fault Lines, Diversity, and Persecution

> THUS THE INNER FLAME of the Pilgrims’ conventicle had gradually dimmed until it had become only a faint point of light in a corner of a populous, dynamic, disputatious world that had suddenly sprung up around it. There were affinities between the Pilgrims’ spiritual aspirations and those of the seemingly multitudinous Puritans who poured into the New England countryside after 1630, but these later comers were people of a different order. Their leaders were anything but humble, and their ambitions were the opposite of modest. They withdrew from the metropolitan world not, like the Pilgrims, to escape it but ultimately to transform it. Substantial gentlemen and merchants connected with some of the movers and shakers in the political and ecclesiastical controversies that were tearing England apart, and preachers of intellectual power, polemical skill, and reputation— they led one of the best organized and most consequential displacements of European peoples that had yet taken place.

> Within a year Saltonstall left, with three of his children, discouraged by New England’s climate, concerned about his family’s finances, and repelled, it was said, by the heavy diet of “clams, and muscles, and ground-nuts, and acorns” he had endured in the first, desperate winter. Lady Arbella died, age twenty-nine, a few weeks after landing; her husband followed within a month, and her brother Charles never settled at all but returned to England on the first available vessel. As for Vane, shortly after his arrival in 1635 he was elected governor, at age twenty-three, pitched himself at once into the most bruising[(6878)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6878)

> knowledge of the Bay Colony, should they decide to migrate there, the “persons of great quality and estate” wrote to inquire what kind of a society New England actually was and whether it would be suitable for people like themselves. So they asked: Did the colony have a bicameral legislature whose upper chamber was reserved for eminences like themselves and their heirs in perpetuity and had veto power over ordinary legislation? Was it true that any man could vote and serve in the lower house simply by virtue of church membership, without regard to wealth and standing? Surely, they wrote, men should be chosen for civil offices, even though “carnal” with respect to the church, if they had “eminent gifts of wisdom, courage, justice, fit for government.”7 The colony’s magistrates and its leading theologian, John Cotton, scrambled to respond. Eager for the support and if possible the presence in New England of such distinguished figures, they assured their lordships that there was no danger that the colony would ever become a “mere democracy.” God, they hastened to say, never advised such a thing: “if the people be governors, who shall be governed?” Nothing in the colony’s organization would “cast the commonwealth into distractions, and popular confusions.” They were no levellers and no advocates of arbitrary rule of any sort. Nor was there a danger, they wrote, that the rule of the godly would lead to “excommunications.” They simply believed, because they knew it was a “divine ordinance (and moral),” that no one should be trusted with public authority, either as voter or magistrate, who was not godly, and since godly people were “fit materials for church fellowship,” it followed that membership in the church should be, and would continue to be, a qualification for political participation. But though the magistrates[(6892)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=6892)

aristocrats ask if they can be special 

> relief. Yet severe as these regional depressions were, and dangerous as was the increase in the “restless fringe” of drifters and the unemployed, there was no general breakdown of community organization, no broad-based, panicked uprising. “Simmering discontent” that broke out into occasional riots was familiar, especially in the more dynamic parts of the realm, which were closely tied to fluctuating European markets and dependent on erratic food supplies to provide for a growing population. And familiar too were the means of alleviating, or at least containing, popular distress until the economic cycle moved upward once again.22 What was not familiar, however, what created the shocks that precipitated the large-scale emigration to New England, were the near apocalyptic decisions made by local leaders in the countryside, clerical and lay, who were not only disillusioned by diminished economic prospects but also fearful of what was clearly a rising wave of religious repression by a newly aggressive, radically conformist ecclesiastical hierarchy. For the areas most severely affected by the economic collapse were also the regions of the highest incidence of Puritanism.[(7052)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=7052)

conformist crackdown 

> and the ultimate goals of spiritual life. The differences mattered, in England as they would in New England. There the fault lines in the English reform movement would become fissures that led to bitter conflicts. For some in the “feathering-out of the reform movement into an increasing host of sects and factions,” reform meant principally a change in ecclesiastical structure: the abolition of Episcopacy in favor of popularly elected preachers and elders organized from the bottom up into a hierarchy of synods and presbyteries culminating in a national assembly free of state control. Others concentrated on a transformation of preaching, seeking to go beyond routine instruction and exegesis to stir people’s emotions, hoping by exuberant exhortations to wring their souls in the search for salvation and to encourage them to adopt a rigorous discipline of sanctified behavior and spiritual striving. Others isolated the phenomenon of baptism as the key reform issue, its essential role in distinguishing the visible from the invisible church of God’s election. Still others demanded the isolation of those who experienced God’s grace into congregations of their own, independent of the overall church yet part of the larger world. And there were some—such were the Pilgrims—for whom there could be no stopping in the escape from the institutionalized life of a formal, national church until one reached exclusive conventicles of saints, withdrawn from the larger world, devoted to their own righteous living and the attainment of their personal salvation. And beyond even such isolates, there were small groups whose fervor carried them into an absolute resolution where one could tolerate no organization whatever—where[(7071)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=7071)

what mattered to puritains 

> Humbler Puritans, devoid of influence, could be tossed into prison and otherwise seriously punished. At one point Rogers apprehensively visited the prisoners in Bridewell and returned troubled by the prospect that he too was “like to loose my liberty” and end up in such a fearful bedlam.25[(7101)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=7101)

even uppercrust preachers were on danger. make analogy to people in prison now 

> What troubled Laud most profoundly was the growing influence of a single large but tightly bound network of eloquent, well-connected, and increasingly popular “inconformists” deeply rooted in affluent parishes in the very heart of metropolitan England. At the center of this dangerous web of subversion was the interrelated clerical dynasty of the Rogers and Ward families, whose destinies, like Chauncy’s, would be fulfilled in New England.31[(7151)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=7151)

> Seven Treatises,[(7156)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=7156)

> One by one the others in the East Anglian Puritan cousinage were identified, and after Parliament was dissolved in 1629 the crackdown, the most severe since the reign of the Catholic Queen Mary, began in earnest.[(7178)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=7178)

> Secret lists were drawn up of leading nonconformists: an Essex list of nine, in 1630, included John Rogers, Samuel Rogers, Nathaniel Ward, and Thomas[(7180)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=7180)

> Samuel Ward and his brother Nathaniel. The latter, having been singled out as an “absolute inconformitarian,” was subjected to court proceedings that lasted for two years. The accusations against him were summarized in forty-three articles, which included charges that he had denounced ritualistic prayers as something “a parrot might be taught” and that one could get “a jack-an-apes or a baboon” to bow as prescribed. Adamant, defiant, he was suspended from his lectureship and ordered to recant and to pay all the court expenses.[(7182)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=7182)

charges against puritans 

> It was not simply that some 60 percent of the region’s adult male population was fully literate (as opposed to 30 percent in rural England) and that perhaps “a major part” of the rest could to some extent read—or indeed, that in the mid-seventeenth century New Englanders “were the equals in literacy of the citizens of Amsterdam and of the best-educated sectors of pre-industrial England.”80 More important was the cultural accomplishments of the settlements’ leadership. At least 130 of the migrants to New England before 1646 had matriculated in Oxford or Cambridge university; eight had attended other European universities. And if the range of years is expanded to 1660 and the definition of “university men” is broadened to include Harvard graduates and those “informally tutored” in[(7753)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=7753)

education nums 

## CHAPTER 13 Abrasions, Utopians, and Holy War

> SOCIAL DISAGREEMENTS, personality conflicts, and theological controversies within this carefully managed exodus to the New World emerged quickly as the thousands of settlers, drawn from every region of England and committed to various shades of religious reform, disembarked and began the tortuous process of settling into the land. Winthrop had hoped that the outcome of this wrenching enterprise and its ultimate justification would be a single harmonious community ruled by a unified magistracy and guided in spiritual matters by clerics in agreement on the essentials of reformed Protestantism. He was the first of the Great Migration to know the bitterness of ideals betrayed. It immediately became clear that the Puritans’ world would consist not of a single integrated community devoted to carefully defined Christian goals but a sprawl of small settlements scattered across the countryside and dominated by contentious magistrates and clerics of increasingly divergent views. In the end Winthrop would live to see, not the maturing of an integrated Puritan community, but the development of a society of divergent opinions and discordant modes of behavior— differences and antagonisms that would be resolved, to the extent that they were resolved, at times by persuasion, at other times by intimidation, and at moments of crisis by vengeful brutality.

> For they brought to the process of land distribution and cultivation a variety of habits and expectations drawn from their earlier lives. Though the settlers sought to join with people they knew personally or who came from the same region, no part of New England and very few towns were populated exclusively by migrants from a single ecological, agricultural district of England. Everywhere people were faced with “strangers very unlike themselves despite their common nationality”; people, Winthrop wrote, who originally had been “absent from eache other many miles, and had [had]…imploymentes as farre distant” were now obliged to live together and collaborate in a common enterprise. If in some areas settlers of a common background were dominant, often their dominance did not last. Neighborhood[(7833)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=7833)

even when just English it was a chaotic mix 

> immigrants to form new towns; and servants, once freed from their obligations, had no choice but to move on until they found steady employment or their own stake in the land.3 Movement, a constant shuffling, was everywhere. Of the 693 heads of household who arrived on the seven ships whose complete passenger lists are known, only 115 remained in their first locations. Though most of these families moved only once, some seemed peripatetic, moving four, five, even six times before settling down permanently. Similarly, of the 939 migrants from London to New England in 1635, only just over one-third remained in the town of their arrival; an equal number moved once before[(7838)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=7838)

migration nums 

> complex, since the two forms had overlapped in certain areas. Further, in many regions the process of enclosure had been in flux, spreading rapidly in modernizing areas in East Anglia, where open-field agriculture had once been dominant, while scarcely penetrating large parts of the Midlands.6 Often at the start of settlement the physical need to collaborate in building new villages and in opening virgin land to cultivation, as well as the desire to keep church communities together, led to some form of communal cooperation. But frequently counterpressures in the end prevailed, and not always peaceably.7 A common experience was that of the village of Andover. Its founders[(7877)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=7877)

> In Ipswich, where most householders could claim considerable property, leadership was tied to wealth; crafts and commercial activities were actively promoted; and a wide economic disparity developed quickly. Ten percent of the original settlers came to control almost half of the town’s wealth, the bottom 50 percent only 12 percent. And the same oligarchic tendency shaped the town’s politics. The town was ruled not by a broadly representative, cooperative town meeting but by a small band of selectmen, and a few families dominated that elite group. Some[(7925)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=7925)

> independent family farms. But the process was irregular, jolted by disputes and confusions. It would be three generations before the pattern of individual, enclosed farms fully evolved. Anomalies in fact survived into the eighteenth century—vestiges of fading memories and peculiar circumstances. But the normalization into a world of independent family farms was irresistible, driven by the universal passion for privately held and independently worked land, despite the inherited constraints that worked[(7989)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=7989)

> down, they were haunted by the common memory of the devastation of Münster a century earlier, when tens of thousands of Anabaptist zealots, led by a Dutch tailor who claimed authority direct from God, had instituted rule by the saints, abolished property, and sanctioned polygamy—only to be slaughtered en masse by enraged armies encouraged by Luther himself. To mention Germany, or Münster, in the context of religious extremism and[(8014)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8014)

> to return to England. But he eluded the colony’s agents, and after spending a bitter winter in an Indian camp, he drew together his family and a small group of followers and with them opened a new settlement on the shores[(8087)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8087)

> however simple, prayed alone, or privately with his wife, and immersed himself in the primitive world around him—the “natural” world of the Narragansett Indians, his closest neighbors. Contrary to almost all other observers, he found among these “wild Americans … a savor of civilitie” superior to the ways of the “civiliz’d world,” a discovery that became the source of the extended meditations on the Indians’ natural humanity, the common nature of all mankind, and the sinfulness of ostensible Christians which he included in the “observations” in his Indian phrasebook, A Key into the Language of America (1643).[(8103)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8103)

Anabaptist admirer of indians 

> capture the troublesome band. Its members were brought to trial in Boston and convicted of “horrible and detestable blasphemies against God, and all Magistracie.” Some were dismissed with warnings, but Gorton and his chief associates were distributed among the towns to work in shackles at hard labor. There they remained, committed to wear “an iron chaine upon one leg,” and not “by word or writing to maintaine any of their blasphemous or wicked errours upon[(8152)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8152)

> and oblivious to external authority, cultivated the familiar practice of gathering together groups of women to discuss recent sermons, she presiding “(gravely) sitting in the chaire” and commenting freely. At first these meetings could be excused as an extension of her role as midwife and herbalist, and her opinions did not appear to be dangerous. But soon her constituency broadened to include men, and as Winthrop noted with alarm, she was presiding over two “public lectures” each week attended by sixty to eighty devotees who appeared to support her increasingly strident condemnation of all the clergy but Cotton for preaching a covenant of works, not grace.[(8231)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8231)

Ann preaching to 60 

## CHAPTER 14 Defiance and Disarray 

> THE PEQUOTS’ THREAT had been eliminated in genocidal slaughter. Yet fears of Indian conspiracies persisted, for Satanic influences could never be finally defeated here below— not in the world at large and not in one’s hearth and home. Thus Stoughton’s troops had no sooner returned from the war than the struggle with threats from within was resumed. Since Wheelwright’s condemnation, the elders, fearful of the insidious spread of Familist or antinomian views, had started the process of barring from immigration into the colony all who “might be dangerous to the commonwealth,” especially since, Winthrop wrote, “it was very probable” that some particularly dangerous people would soon be arriving from what was considered to be the true pit of English Familism, the notorious village of Grindleton, in Yorkshire. In fact, no Grindletonians ever migrated to New England. The main effect of the restrictive statute was to deny entrance to Hutchinson’s quite inoffensive brother-in-law Samuel and “some other of Mr. Wheelwright’s friends,” which was “taken very ill” by Winthrop’s opponents and touched off “many hot speeches.” And it led Cotton, who believed the ban would bar from entrance “godly passengers” who saw the truth as he did, to consider leaving the colony for another. But the real danger, the leaders knew, lay not at the port of entry but deep within the hearts of Hutchinson’s and Wheelwright’s resident sympathizers. And it was to cauterize their dangerous errors before they spread further that a synod of the colony’s clerics and elders was assembled, charged with identifying and refuting every one of the theological nodes of malignancy. 
[(8387)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8387)

> Mary Oliver, said to be more eloquent and zealous even than Hutchinson, was imprisoned for insisting on being made a member of the Salem church, and when she argued for open membership and other “very dangerous” opinions, she was whipped and clapped in the stocks, her tongue clamped with a cleft stick. And a series of other prosecutions[(8600)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8600)

totalitarian repression of dissent 

> However deviant the dissidents of the 1630s had been, they had not challenged such fundamentals as the sanctity of Scripture, the principles of predestination and original sin, and the propriety of religious “ordinances”: the sacraments, scripted orders of worship, structured preaching, and the formalities of prayer. With all of this the Quakers had broken, substituting belief in a universally shared Inner Light of God’s benevolence as the ultimate guide, wide-open participation in unstructured worship, and contempt for both parochial jurisdictions and the hierarchy of deference and social organization. Yet—and in this lay their ultimate threat—despite their rejection of the substance and structure of organized Protestantism, they shared with the more radical Puritans a mystical strain and a fervent millennialism that blurred the[(8630)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8630)

how Quakers were diff err ent 

> Quakerism for them was therefore doubly dangerous: utterly defiant and disparaging of organized, rational religion, yet associated with familiar radical doctrines of the immanence of the Holy Spirit. The Quakers were thus as demonic as the devilish Indians, to whom they were frequently compared, and as terrifying in their “spiritual phrenzy” and “frantick passions” as the bloody anarchists of Münster, who, some said, were their exact predecessors in promoting chaos. And the worst of it, for the local authorities, was that some of the Quakers’ seeds fell on fertile ground.18 Despite the formal success[(8636)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8636)

> colonies. In Massachusetts, anyone professing the “pernitious opinions & practices” of those “quaking and trembling anthusiasts” who take uppon them to be immediately sent of God, and infallibly asisted by the spirit to speake & write blasphemouth opinions, despising government & the order of God in church & commonwealth, speaking evill of dignities, reproaching and reviling magistrates and ministers, seeking to turne the people from the faith, & gaine proselites to theire pernicious wayes —all such blasphemers were to be severely whipped, locked up in jail, and then shipped out of the colony. Those who returned would have an ear cut off; those who appeared yet again, another ear; and the women among them would be “severely whipt.” For a third offense “they shall have theire toungues bored through with a hot iron.” If after all of that and other punishments they still persisted, they would be banished “on paine of death.”20 And so it was. Half-naked women were flogged, men’s ears cropped and their bodies savagely beaten. Finally, with Boston patrolled by a special guard of thirty-six soldiers, four of the proselytizing Quakers, defiantly testifying to the Truth in Boston and[(8657)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8657)

punishment of quakers 

> invaded the Bible Commonwealth, and though battered and bruised and repeatedly jailed and banished, in their prophetic zeal they had sufficiently convinced dozens of New England radicals to see the beauty of the Quakers’ absolute subjectivity and creedless illumination and to profess the prohibited faith.[(8671)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8671)

Quakers won converts 

> Punishments, however, continued. Recidivist Quakers were to be tied half naked to a cart’s tail and whipped from town to town until out of the colony, and upon successive returns to be branded on the shoulder. (In New Haven they were to be branded on the hand.) So three women in Maine—“vagabond Quakers”—were whipped, bleeding, through several miles of knee-deep snow. Women who appeared in church in sackcloth, their faces smeared with ashes (“the greatest and most amazing uproar that I ever saw”—Samuel Sewell), were frantically suppressed; and men who interrupted sermons by smashing bottles together in symbolic demonstration of the Puritans’ ultimate demise were dragged[(8704)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8704)

amazing scene of Quaker dissent 

> He agreed that the first generation of Quakers had been “Madmen, a sort of Lunaticks, Daemoniacks and Energumens,” fitter for a madhouse than a gallows; but in time they would have “come to nothing if the Civil Magistrate had not inflicted any Civil Penalty upon them.” It would have been enough, he thought, if, as a Plymouth councilor had proposed, they had been forced to have their Heads Shaved—a “Capital” punishment to be sure (Mather could not resist the pun) that “would have both Sham’d and Cur’d them.”25[(8712)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8712)

Quaker mad house

> publicly charged with excessive profiteering: “taking above six-pence in the shilling profit; in some above eight-pence; and, in some small things, above two for one.” The General Court fined him for this offense £200, but then reduced the fine to £80. The church then took up the matter. The elders studied “how farr I was guilty of all those claymors and rumors that then I lay under” and, after an “exquisite search” into Keayne’s defense, condemned him “in the Name of the Church for selling his wares[(8736)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8736)

profit 

> I have not lived an idle, lazie or dronish life nor spent my time wantonly, fruitlessly or in company keeping [nor]…had in my whole time either in Old England or New, many spare houres to spend unprofitably away or to refresh myselfe with recreations, except reading and writing hath beene a recreation to me which sometimes is mixt with paine and labor enough, but have rather studyed and endeavored to redeeme my time as a thing most deare and precyous to me.[(8757)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8757)

work ethic 

> The doctrine of the just price, which he was accused of having violated and which conflicted head-on with the entrepreneurial instincts fortified by Puritanism’s worldly asceticism, was integral to the medieval substratum of Puritan belief, and[(8777)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8777)

> Price controls had to be imposed, but they failed; wage ceilings had to be mandated, but they were largely ignored; and sumptuary laws, reflecting the Puritans’ horror of display, vainglory, and economic waste—and reflecting also the social disarray, the disordering of traditional statuses, inherent in a borderland society—were passed, but[(8781)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8781)

> preached in Ipswich, Massachusetts, explained, in his rollicking, satirical Simple Cobler of Aggawam (1647), with appropriate reference to Hebrews 11:9, that while “no man ought to forsake his own[(8838)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8838)

> however, Thomas Hutchinson later wrote, “it became a proverbial expression, to say of a false man who betrayed his trust, that he was an arrant George Downing.”39[(8936)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8936)

> was a stimulus for new, imaginative, and innovative enterprises that would make Boston and its environs a hub of Atlantic commerce. But the transition from the gnarled world of Robert Keayne to the soaring amplitudes of the new commercial entrepreneurs would not be easy.[(8955)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8955)

> 1660 it was defunct.43 There remained the possibility that New England’s economy could be rescued and would remain as independent as its churches and government if native manufactures could be created that would supply at least the two most vital imports: cloth goods and iron products. In 1640 the General Court of Massachusetts offered a bounty on every shilling’s worth of linen and woolen and cotton cloth spun and woven by the settlers, and required all servants and children to use their free time working on hemp and flax, which Connecticut ordered all families to plant. But it was wool that had the greatest promise, especially with the[(8981)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8981)

> The town of Rowley, settled by Yorkshire cloth workers, was productive and built a fulling and cloth-processing mill, but the legislation greatly exaggerated the effectiveness of government regulation in frontier communities. The laws could not be enforced, and it quickly became clear that New England would not develop a textile industry sufficient for its needs.44 But if furs[(8989)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=8989)

> agronomist, and ebullient “projector,” Dr. Robert Child.45 The Cambridge-educated son of a prosperous landholder in Kent, Child had completed an extensive tour of Europe, touching base with circles of advanced scientific and commercial thinkers from Amsterdam to Rome, when he completed his medical studies in Padua in 1638. Then twenty-five, he joined Hartlib’s circle and immersed himself in advanced alchemical, agricultural, and commercial studies.[(9004)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9004)

> England. Upon his return to New England with a shipload of miners, foundrymen, and laborers, he had launched the construction at Saugus of a highly subsidized bloomery for smelting ore, a rolling and slitting mill, and a forge for crafting finished ironware products. He had extracted important concessions from the[(9023)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9023)

> There was bitterness everywhere in New England, he reported to Hartlib, “breach upon breach”—between ministers and people and between members and nonmembers of the official community. Truly, he wrote, if things remained for long the way they were, everything would be lost. The situation had become so bad, he wrote, that to escape the Puritans’ jurisdiction, he had decided to move to Maine, which he assumed was beyond Massachusetts’s jurisdiction.[(9044)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9044)

> First: though they were all English, they had been denied the “sure and comfortable enjoyment of our lives, libertyes, and estates, according to our due and naturall rights, as freeborne subjects of the English nation.” What was needed was the establishment of “the fundamentall and wholesome lawes of our native country … agreeable to our English tempers” in place of the peculiar ordinances of the Bible Commonwealth. Second: the limitation of the colony’s franchise and officeholding to church members was odious, and in this they spoke for the “many thousands,” including friends of the victorious reform Parliament of England, who had been disbarred from “all civill imployments” in the colony, though they were freely taxed and their goods seized at will. Massachusetts, they pointed out, was not a sovereign state but merely “a colonie or corporation of England.” The denial of English rights had led to “secret discontents, murmurings … discouragements in their callings, unsettlednes in their minds, strife, [and] contention … The Lord only knows to what a flame in time it may kindle.” And third: the “sober, righteous and godly” members of the Church of England, even those agreeable to the “latest and best reformation of England, Scotland, &c” (i.e., Presbyterians) were denied communion in New England’s churches. And they were compelled “under a severe fine, every Lords day to appear at the congregation” and to attend the baptism of other men’s children but not their own. Give liberty to the Church of England members, they wrote; take them into your congregations, that they may enjoy all of Christ’s liberties and ordinances. All of this, the Remonstrants insisted, must be done or, they concluded portentously, we “shall be necessitated to apply our humble desires to the honourable houses of parliament, who we hope will take our sad conditions into their serious considerations.”50 The threat was not[(9067)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9067)

freeform English rights triumph 

> All were convinced that New England had to “learn commerce or perish.”[(9192)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9192)

> “Winthrop,” probably John, Jr., whose uncle Emmanuel Downing had written enthusiastically about the value of importing slaves. “I doe not see,” he wrote, “how wee can thrive untill wee gett into a stock of slaves suffitient to doe all out buisnes.” For indentured servants, he explained, will “desire freedome to plant for them selves, and not stay but for verie great wages.” It is cheaper to maintain twenty “Moores,” he concluded, than one English servant.63[(9249)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9249)

perfect slave vs indentured quote 

> But stronger forces were at work. In 1663 the powerful Salem preacher John Higginson cried out, in his election day sermon, against the notion that God’s purpose in establishing New England was “the getting of this world’s good.” Never forget, he declared to his congregation and to the world at large, “that New England is originally a plantation of religion, not a plantation of trade.” Nine years later his daughter Sarah married Richard Wharton.66[(9293)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9293)

## CHAPTER 15 The British Americans 

> THEY LIVED CONFLICTED LIVES, beset with conflicts experienced, rumored, or recalled— unrelenting racial conflicts, ferocious and savage; religious conflicts, as bitter within as between confessions; conflicts with authority, private and public; recurrent conflicts over property rights, legal obligations, and status; and conflicts created by the slow emergence of vernacular cultures, blendings of disparate subcultures adjusting to the demands of heightened aspirations and local circumstance.

> There was never a time, over a half century of settlement, when there was not a racial conflict in one or another of the European colonies in coastal North America— not only random killings on isolated border lands and deadly attacks by ruthless traders, but concerted wars of devastation different from the precontact Indian wars and beyond the rules of civilized warfare, the principles of just war, and Christian moderation, which in some degree had softened the impact of military conflict in Europe. If there were familiar precedents for the Indian wars in seventeenth-century North America, they were the exceptions to the normal practices of European warfare: the merciless slaughter and devastation reserved for conquered towns and cities that refused to surrender when sieged; domestic rebels who openly challenged established regimes; or heretics whose radical doctrines threatened to destroy the stability of civil society. For these, in the wars of the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, there had been, and was, no mercy. So in Elizabethan Ireland, where the conquering English were convinced that the natives were utter barbarians who lived like beasts, “more uncivill, more uncleanly, more barbarous, and more brutish … than in any other parts of the world” and that their warriors were mere rebels and traitors, there were no limits on the conquerors’ savagery. Again and again whole garrisons were massacred, hundreds of men, women, and children slaughtered whether or not they resisted, and terror tactics were unrestrained. Humphrey Gilbert famously lined up on both sides of the path to his tent the severed heads of some of those he had killed so that those who came to speak with him were forced to see “the heddes of their dedde fathers, brothers, children, kinsfolks and freindes lye upon the grounde before their faces.” Rebels in England suffered similarly brutal fates. And nothing had been more devastating, and better known throughout Protestant Europe, than the Duke of Alba’s savagery in his efforts to suppress the Dutch revolt. The retaliatory executions in the conquered city of Mons, in Hainault, proceeded at a leisurely pace: for a full year “ten, twelve, twenty persons were often hanged, burned, or beheaded in a single day.”1[(9312)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9312)

European war barbarity 

> the Virginia Company’s hoped-for “perpetuall Warr without peace or truce”—that lasted from 1607 to 1664 and beyond, to reach its climax in the ferocious upheavals, north and south, in the 1670s.[(9326)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9326)

> That bloody effort of the last of the major Powhatan chiefs, Opechancanough, to repel the encroaching English failed, after murdering four to five hundred settlers, but it led to two years of the same kind of retaliatory village burnings, contrived famines, and killings that had followed the massacre of 1622. The Dutch war subsided, but there was no peace, only a respite before the resumption of warfare in the 1650s, now focused on defending New Netherland’s northern communities and the pursuit of the Indians to the west.[(9338)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9338)

> duty. Only for the Dutch, arguably the most ferocious of the Indian fighters, were the moral issues confronted as such. Mindful that they themselves had been victims of a conqueror’s savagery and proud of their humanist tradition, they could not evade the ethical implications of what was happening in their settlements and on their distant frontier. The Dutch West India Company’s blistering condemnation of Kieft’s War, in which every word carried a freight of distinct meaning—“unnatural, barbarous, unnecessary, unjust, and disgraceful”—was sincere.[(9345)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9345)

> found. At this point Stuyvesant opposed the war, was outvoted, then equivocated, until pressure from the panicked settlers, fearful for their lives, forced him to launch the war, which, like its predecessors, was fought[(9352)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9352)

> different backgrounds and conditions into the unfamiliar life of tobacco farms, were compounded by the arrival in the same years of steadily increasing numbers of slaves. By 1660 they numbered approximately nine hundred, brought in mainly from the West Indies. Though they formed only 3.6 percent of the total population, their numbers were rising at almost three times the rate of the rest of the population. Further, by 1650 perhaps 150 convicted felons had arrived, and by 1661 they were coming in a steady flow—a small flow, but enough to cause grave concern, especially after a servant[(9506)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9506)

nums 

> complete ban on the further importation of “jaile birds or such others who for notorious offenses have deserved to dye in England,” a move that Maryland followed six years later. Given the relative[(9511)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9511)

> This heterogeneous population—indentured servants from a variety of English subcultures, Africans from the West Indies, English convicts, Irish vagabonds, and Scottish war prisoners—formed in the Chesapeake lands a labor force that was restive, quarrelsome, ill disciplined, and latently rebellious. With the new servant[(9517)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9517)

> violent. For “the work was unceasing, seldom relieved by amusement or relaxation, and shelter or provisions were frequently lacking. Loneliness broke the spirit, work weakened the body, disease contributed to ill health, and many servants died before they fulfilled their indentures.” Some[(9521)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9521)

> continued to be fined or whipped and forced to serve an extra year or two to make up for the lost labor. Not much notice was taken when a manservant who attempted to escape with stolen guns and a canoe was severely beaten and given five and a half years of extra labor, nor even when another died of a beating with a rake handle. It[(9525)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9525)

> For, the Assembly stated in 1662, “the barbarous usage of some servants by cruell masters bring soe much scandal and infamy to the country … that people who would willingly adventure themselves hither are through fear thereof diverted.” “Barbarous”—[(9531)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9531)

> in the long run slaves were more profitable laborers than servants. Planters in Maryland and Virginia knew as well as Emmanuel Downing in Massachusetts that it was cheaper to maintain twenty “Moores” than one English servant. But only in the long run. Slaves were expensive—a healthy adult male was priced at about £23 at midcentury—and required at least a modicum of lifelong care. Ordinary planters could seldom afford them and could not easily include them within the family structure of their farms. But increasingly slaves appear in the records of the more affluent, and by 1675, as the result of hundreds of private, unrecorded decisions, they became common on the region’s plantations. The change was rapid. By the 1650s slaves[(9816)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9816)

> lower James and York rivers, often working side by side with servants; by the 1660s, 15 percent of York County’s population was black. By 1670 over half of the estates in both Virginia and Maryland had slaves, and thereafter their importation boomed, not uniformly across the region but differentially, according to affluence and influence. The councilors and officials took the lead, Lorena Walsh writes, in[(9822)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9822)

nuns 

> By 1675 the stress lines in Chesapeake society had become clear. A restive, footloose, unsettled population of land-hungry former servants exposed to Indian assaults pressed against an established population of small-scale planters and farmers active in the local courts and, through their deputies, in the Burgesses. They in turn were sensitive to pressure from increasingly aggressive gentry families intent on creating great estates that required demanding personal management. The most successful of the newly risen gentry collaborated, when they could, with the powerful and erratic Crown officials, none of whom were native to the land, few of whom spent much time in the land, and all of whom took office for the profits that might result. And feverish land speculation was driving up land values, to the spectacular benefit of some but for many a keen sense of real and relative deprivation.[(9830)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9830)

## Notable notes...

> 11. Alvin H. Morrison, “Dawnland Dog-Feast: Wabanaki Warfare c. 1600–1760,” in William Cowan, ed., Papers of the Twenty-First Algonquian Conference (Ottawa, 1990), 267–69; William A. Starna and Ralph Watkins, “Northern Iroquoian Slavery,” Ethnohistory, 38, no. 1 (1991), 34–57; Rountree, Powhatan Indians, 84; Richter, Ordeal of the Longhouse, chaps. 2, 3. On the rites of prisoner sacrifice among the Hurons, see Bruce G. Trigger, The Children of Aataentsic: A History of the[(9972)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=9972)

sources for dispelling nostalgia 're: native Americans 

> Theodore K. Rabb, Enterprise & Empire … 1575–1630 (Cambridge, Mass., 1967), 29ff.; Robert Brenner, Merchants and Revolution … 1550–1653 (Princeton, N.J., 1993), chaps. 1, 2, 92.[(10137)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=10137)

> Nicholas P. Canny, “The Ideology of English Colonization: From Ireland to America,” WMQ 30 (1973), 584, 588; David B. Quinn, The Elizabethans and the Irish (Ithaca, N.Y., 1966), chaps. 7–9.[(10147)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=10147)

> 10. Keith Thomas, Religion and the Decline of Magic (London, 1971), esp. chaps. 21, 22; Edward L. Bond, “Source of Knowledge, Source of Power: The Supernatural World of English Virginia,” VMHB, 108 (2000), quotations at 114, 116, 120; cf. David D. Hall, Worlds of Wonder, Days of Judgment: Popular Religious Belief in Early New England (New York, 1989).[(10149)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=10149)

> Ibid., 357–69; Konig, “Colonization and the Common Law in Ireland and Virginia, 1569–1634,” in James A. Henretta, Michael Kammen, and Stanley Katz, eds., The Transformation of Early American History (New York, 1991), 81–92; William E. Nelson, The Common Law in Colonial America, I (Oxford, England, 2008), 14–18. 19. Billings, ed., Old Dominion, 43.[(10282)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=10282)

> “The Iberian Roots of American Racist Thought,” ibid.,[(10709)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=10709)

> 22. On the ambiguities in the use of the word slave: Robert McColley, “Slavery in Virginia: 1619–1660: A Reexamination,” in Robert H. Abzug and Stephen E. Maizlish, eds., New Perspectives on Race and Slavery in America (Lexington, Ky., 1986), 12–15; Helen T. Catterall and James J. Hayden, eds., Judicial Cases Concerning American Slavery and the Negro (Washington, D.C., 1926–37), IV, 2 n7 (the petition of the father of an indentured servant girl, “crav[ing] that his daughter may not be made a slave, a terme soe scandalous that if admitted to be the condicion or tytle the apprentices in this province will be so distructive as noe free borne Christians will ever be induced to come over [as] servants”). 23. Jordan, White Over Black, 81 (“Certainly it was the case in Maryland and Virginia that the legal enactment of Negro slavery followed social practice, rather than vice versa … slavery was less a matter of previous conception or external example in Maryland and Virginia than elsewhere”); April L. Hatfield, Atlantic Virginia (Philadelphia, 2004), 154–55.[(10710)](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B0082XLXOO&location=10710)

sources on race etc 
