# The Great Awakening: The Roots of Evangelical Christianity in Colonial America by Professor Thomas S. Kidd

> Its chief tributaries were Continental Pietism, Scots-Irish Presbyterianism, and Anglo-American Puritanism. Historian David Bebbington has identified four characteristics of evangelicalism: conversionism ("the belief that lives need to be changed"), activism ("the expression of the gospel in effort"), biblicism ("a particular regard for the Bible"), and crucicentrism ("a stress on the sacrifice of Christ on the cross"). This definition remains quite serviceable for evangelicals generally, but Bebbington's "quadrilateral" does not adequately distinguish early evangelicalism from movements that preceded it. Evangelicalism did, no doubt, inaugurate new emphases on the discernible moment of an individual's conversion, or the "new birth," and the simultaneous conversion of many individuals during revivals. Activism, biblicism, and crucicentrism, however, characterized many Protestant movements of the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries, including evangelicalism. Missing from Bebbington's definition is early evangelicalism's new attention to the person of the Holy Spirit, particularly in revival. Early American evangelicalism was distinguished from earlier forms of Protestantism by dramatically increased emphases on seasons of revival, or outpourings of the Holy Spirit, and on converted sinners experiencing God's love personally. Both the role of the Spirit and the methods of revival were hotly contested among early American evangelicals.'  ([63](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=63))

> Historians have often described the "Great Awakening" of the 1740s as a battle between "Old Lights" and "New Lights;" with the former opposing the revivals and the latter supporting them. But a close look at early American evangelicalism shows how oversimplified the Old Lights versus New Lights framework is. In this book I present evangelicalism as having fluid boundaries that changed over time. Instead of Old Lights and New Lights, we should think of the debates over this movement in terms of three points on a continuum. On one end were the antirevivalists, who dismissed the revivals as religious frenzy or "enthusiasm." In the middle were the moderate evangelicals, who supported the revivals at their outset but became concerned about the chaotic, leveling extremes that the awakenings produced. Finally, on the other end were the radical evangelicals, who eagerly embraced the Spirit's movements, even if social conventions had to be sacrificed.'  ([71](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=71))

> One can appreciate, then, why many might have viewed radical evangelicals as a threat to a well-ordered society. Radical evangelicals ordained untutored, and occasionally nonwhite, men as pastors. They sometimes allowed women and nonwhites to serve as deacons or even as elders. They led crowds of the poor, children, and nonwhites singing through the streets. They permitted Native Americans, African Americans, and women to exhort in mixed congregations, and they commended their words as worthy of white male attention. They endorsed the visionary, ecstatic experiences of the disenfranchised. They believed that individuals could have immediate assurance of salvation by the indwelling witness of the Spirit. They affirmed laypeople's right to critique their pastors and founded new churches fully committed to radical revival. While to modern eyes, the radicals' innovations may seem modest, they were for their time well-nigh revolutionary. In the revivals, the world seemed to turn upside down as those with the very least agency in eighteenth-century America felt the power of God surge in their bodies.' Once evangelist ([78](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=78))

> Nathan Hatch's celebrated The Democratization of American Christianity, ([89](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=89))

> Led by such books as W. R. Ward's The Protestant Evangelical Awakening (1992) and Mark Noll's The Rise of Evangelicalism (2003), historians have realized how tightly connected American evangelicals were with colleagues of similar predilections in Continental Europe and Great Britain. In this book I affirm that international interpretation, with early chapters describing how American evangelicalism grew out of English Puritanism, Scots-Irish Presbyterianism, and Continental Pietism. Readers will note, however, that once the American revivals begin in earnest, around 1740, the international perspective fades from my narrative. My closer focus on internal American developments does not imply that the international influences had ceased to be important, but as I wrote ([91](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=91))

> George Whitefield, has been revolutionized through outstanding biographies by Frank Lambert and Harry Stout. The study of Jonathan Edwards is an industry unto itself, highlighted by wonderful recent biographies by George Marsden and Philip Gura and the imminent completion of the Works of Jonathan Edwards series by Yale University Press. ([107](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=107))

> As I demonstrated in my previous book, The Protestant Interest: New England after Puritanism (2004), British nationalism, Protestant internationalism, and anti-Catholicism shaped New England's public religious culture after the Glorious Revolution of 1688. Between 1688 and 1763, Britain and France, and sometimes Spain, fought a series of wars that routinely spilled into the North American colonies, creating fears among many colonists that Catholic powers would overwhelm and destroy them. Revival, then, became a means by which the churches could return to true godliness and, it was hoped, be delivered from the Catholic menace.'  ([116](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=116))

> Another key development that helped birth the evangelical movement was the so-called consumer revolution of the eighteenth century and, in particular, the advent of new media sources and techniques. As Frank Lambert showed in his Inventing the "Great Awakening" (1999), widespread newspaper and book distribution helped create the idea of a Great Awakening. Evangelicals from George Whitefield and Jonathan Edwards to Billy Graham and Rick Warren have always used the latest media technology and techniques to promote revival. Thus, the circulation of books like Edwards's A Faithful Narrative and Whitefield's Journals and of Thomas Prince's magazine the Christian History was critical for generating excitement about the revivals and expectations that awakenings could happen in towns receiving those publications, too. One also cannot discount the role that simple hard work played in generating the awakenings. Revivalists traveled unbelievable distances and risked health and comfort in order to preach the gospel to thousands across the Atlantic world.  ([119](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=119))

> but then historian Jon Butler argued that it was only an "interpretative fiction" invented by nineteenth-century Christian historians. ([125](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=125))

> Some evangelicals also began a great assault on the churchly establishments of colonial America, and the revolutionary move for disestablishment on the federal and state levels can largely be attributed to evangelical and deist cooperation in favor of the separation of church and state."  ([132](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=132))

> Butler finally claimed that, contrary to the suggestions of previous scholars, the link between the revivals and the American Revolution is virtually nonexistent." As I indicate in chapter 18, "`The God of Glory is on Our Side,"' I am in substantial agreement with Butler on this point. ([134](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=134))

> In sum, in this book I contend that there was, indeed, a powerful, unprecedented series of revivals from about 1740 to 1743 that touched many of the colonies and that contemporaries remembered for decades as a special visitation of the Holy Spirit. Calling this event "the" Great Awakening does present historical problems. Chief among them is that the standard framework of the "First" and "Second" Great Awakenings may obscure the fact that the evangelical movement continued to develop after 1743 and before 1800. There were important, widespread revivals that happened before the First, and between the First and Second, Great Awakenings. ([138](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=138))

> Additionally, when one recognizes that evangelicalism was a movement not defined just by revivals, then a whole range of missions, agendas, and less celebrated developments open to our view. Thus, this book is not solely about "the" Great Awakening of the 1740s, though those revivals form an indispensable part of our story and roughly half of this text's content. In the book I examine, instead, what we might call the long First Great Awakening and the contest to define its boundaries. Although many revivals, including the major season from 1740 to 1743, happened during this period, revivals alone did not delineate the early evangelical movement. Instead, persistent desires for revival, widespread individual conversions, and the outpouring of the Holy Spirit distinguished the new evangelicals. The long First Great Awakening started before Jonathan Edwards's 1734-35 Northampton revival and lasted roughly through the end of the American Revolution, when disestablishment, theological change, and a new round of growth started the (even more imprecise) "Second" Great Awakening. The controversial emergence of the religion of the new birth demarcated the long First Great Awakening and the first generation of American evangelical Christianity.  ([141](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=141))

> 1 "PRAYER FORA SAVING ISSUE": FROM PURITANS TO EVANGELICALS To expect revival, one had to experience despair, a mood in which the New England Puritans specialized. Puritan church leaders began lamenting the decline of their godly experiment beginning in the 166os and 1670s. Michael Wig- glesworth's poem "God's Controversy with New England" (1662) featured God warning formerly devout New Englanders that Your sinus me press as sheaves do load a cart, And therefore I will plague you for this geare Except you seriously, and soon, repent, Ile not delay your pain and heavy punishment. Calls for moral reformation seemed not to stanch a perceived flood of immorality and divine judgments In the 1670s, Puritan leaders began calling for an out-pouring of the Holy Spirit to revive their languishing churches, and some also began experimenting with new measures that raised the possibility of corporate renewal of individual churches and towns.  ([147](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=147))

> "Work of Reformation," but he thought each person's more pressing need was a "Heart-reformation, or making of a new heart." The churches would not revive through their moral efforts, Torrey argued, but only when God would pour "out [an] abundance of converting grace, and so revive and renew the work of Conversion." Too ([158](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=158))

> The mood in New England following King Philip's War (1675-76) was bleak and raw, and Torrey and Flint thought it obvious that "we are a people in extream danger of perishing, ([164](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=164))

> "0 when God comes to Save New-England by himself, we shall see and feel wonderful effects & changes." Hearkening back to Governor John Winthrop's vision for New England in A Model of Christian Charity (1630), Torrey assured his audience that God "will magnifie New-England again before the world ... God will ... Save us from our sins & apostacy, by the power of his Spirit, in a general work of Conversion and Reformation; and bya glorious resurrection of Religion."' God indeed had a controversy with New Englanders because of their lack of repentance, but God himself would set them right when he sent the revival.  ([174](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=174))

> after King Philip's War, New England saw what one might call a revival of renewals: a great new interest in corporate commitments to God and the covenant. The war had created a new sense of desperation among pious New Englanders, making the time right for widespread repentance 6  ([180](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=180))

> The halfway system ensured that the churches would be filled with substantial numbers of pseudo-members waiting for their conversion. That situation set the stage for episodes of spiritual excitement that precipitated mass numbers of conversions. The ([185](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=185))

> Thomas Prince later recalled these events as the first "Instances of the transient REVIVAL of Religion."'  ([188](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=188))

> Danforth reported in February 1705 that "we are much encouraged by an unusual and amazing Impression, made by GOD'S SPIRIT on all Sorts among us, especially on the young Men and Women." The young people had become sober as a result of the meetings and some "awful Deaths and amazing Providences." He hoped that their sobriety was not temporary and asked for "Prayer, that these Strivings of the SPIRIT, may have a saving Issue." On March 1, Danforth led the covenant renewal itself. The covenant of 1676 was read aloud, and "We gave Liberty to all Men and Women Kind, from sixteen Years old and upwards to act with us," and three hundred people added their names to a list forsaking sin. He thought perhaps a hundred more would soon submit their names. Danforth also noted a number ([209](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=209))

> Taunton's renewal was only one of many revivals before the "First" Great Awakening. In the 1710s and 1720S these episodes became more frequent in New England 13 Much of the earliest revival activity, in the form of covenant renewals, was in eastern Massachusetts, but the trend toward revivalism was also growing in the Connecticut River valley, particularly under the ministry of Solomon Stoddard of Northampton, Massachusetts, the grandfather of and ministerial predecessor to Jonathan Edwards. Stoddard passed on a considerable evangelical heritage to Edwards, as Edwards noted in his A Faithful Narrative of the Surprising Work of God (1737). He ([219](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=219))

> Stoddard developed the most elaborate evangelical theology of conversion prior to Edwards. As an orthodox Calvinist, Stoddard believed that the Spirit of God drew sinners to salvation, but he also considered powerful preaching the means that God often used to draw people. Thus Stoddard recommended that preachers should warn of the threat of damnation, on one hand, and offer the hope of salvation through Christ's grace, on the other. This view no doubt heavily influenced his grandson Edwards. Stoddard argued that the dread of damnation was the most, and perhaps the only, effective means to lead sinners to true "humiliation," or a sense that their sin was deplorable in light of God's holiness. God ([229](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=229))

> Stoddard noted in The Efficacy of the Fear of Hell, to Restrain Men from Sin (1713) that ([239](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=239))

> Although he thought that the Spirit alone brought conversions, he believed that God chose to send the Spirit in response to believers' prayers. The more news became available about missions, ([261](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=261))

> "Oh that the Jewish Nation were Converted! Oh that the fullness of the Gentiles were come in! Oh that our Lord Jesus Christ would Come and take possession of the World for himself!"20 ([264](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=264))

> Adams, along with East Windsor's Timothy Edwards, Norwich's Benjamin Lord, Windham's Samuel Whiting, and Windsor's Jonathan Marsh, formed the most activist contingent yet of evangelical ministers in New England. This group helped lead a series of revivals in the Connecticut River valley in the 1710s and 172os.  ([270](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=270))

> Revivals had begun in force, but printers did not yet fully back the creation of awakenings as major media events the way they would in the early 1740s. Because it received little contemporary notice, the Connecticut revival has not only been largely forgotten, but at the time it remained a regional revival and did not flow to other parts of the colonies.24 The most significant ([286](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=286))

> "God has by the late amazing Earth-quake Layd open my neglect before me that I see no way to escape. But by fleeing to Christ for refuge. God in that hour Set all my Sins before me. When I was Shaking over the pit looking every moment when the earth would open her mouth and Swallow me up and then must I have been miserable for ever & for ever." His ([293](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=293))

> He particularly noted people's waste and overindulgence: "the Superfluities of their voluptuous Tables," sexual immorality, lying, Sabbath-breaking, financial oppression, and extortion being their worst sins. ([313](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=313))

> But the fear of the earthquake did not last, and "there has since been great Reason to complain of our speedy Return to our former Sins." This became a familiar cycle for evangelicals: bursts of revival would invariably be followed by a waning of fervor and a waxing of worldliness. ([323](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=323))

> This was the Northampton revival led by Solomon Stoddard's bookish grandson, Jonathan Edwards. Despite its limitations, the earthquake revival helped New England's growing evangelical cohort to think collectively about the potential for massive, publicized revival 30 Clearly, Puritanism helped shape ([326](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=326))

> "And then a concern about the great things of religion began, about the latter end of December and the beginning of January, to prevail abundantly in the town, till in a very little time it became universal throughout the town, among old and young, and from the highest to the lowest. All seemed to be seized with a deep concern about their eternal salvation.."' So Jonathan Edwards described the beginnings of what became the most influential revival in the history of evangelicalism, the Northampton awakening of 1734-35. ([332](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=332))

> Edwards was not the most important preacher of his era. Surely that distinction rests with George Whitefield. But Edwards's deep roots in the Reformed and Puritan spiritual tradition, combined with his uncanny brilliance, made him the greatest American articulator of the evangelical view of God, man, and revival. Edwards's background prepared him to become the evangelical giant that he was. His father Timothy was a formidable revivalist, and Jonathan converted under his ministry. Jonathan's "Personal Narrative" traced the beginnings of his own conversion to "a time of remarkable awakening in my father's congregation" when he was nine years old. He began to pray fervently, five times a day, and met with other boys in the congregation to pray. Edwards and his friends "built a booth in a swamp, in a very secret and retired place, for a place of prayer." Though one can see that this was no ordinary boy, Edwards never considered his piety a natural inclination, and soon the immature fervor dulled. As he bluntly put it, he "returned like a dog to his vomit, and went on in the ways of sin.."'  ([335](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=335))

> There was a single point in time, however, when God regenerated a saint's soul. The believer might not be able definitively to pinpoint that moment, but for the truly saved, the spiritual trajectory was always upward, toward delighting in the ways of God and away from idolatry.' So it was for Edwards.  ([345](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=345))

> Even as he attended Yale for his pastoral training, Edwards was not convinced of his own salvation. The main problem blocking Edwards's conversion was his inability to accept the doctrine of God's sovereignty, especially in salvation. If God was entirely sovereign over the created order, then certainly that must mean that he controlled the eternal destiny of humans, the pinnacle of creation. To Edwards this was no mere theological proposition, for it was intimately involved with the question of his own fate. His salvation came through an admission that he would no longer contest God's supreme authority. This was not an assent to dry doctrine, but an emotional repudiation of sin and embracing of God's ultimate power. The elect enjoyed God's sovereignty, and pursuing salvation meant seeking a "delightful conviction" of the omnipotence of God.'  ([347](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=347))

> Jonathan then walked out to his father's pasture, and as he "looked up on the sky and clouds; there came into my mind, a sweet sense of the glorious majesty and grace of God, that I know not how to express. I seemed to see them both in a sweet conjunction: majesty and meekness joined together: it was a sweet and gentle, and holy majesty; and also a majestic meekness; an awful sweetness; a high and great, and holy gentleness." Edwards ([355](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=355))

> His sermon, soon published as God Glorified in the Work of Redemption, offered little that was new, but it took a clear stance against the enticements of rationalist Arminianism. Arminians had won many fashionable Anglo-American pulpits, arguing that man had free will to choose salvation. Surely God would not predestine anyone to damnation, the rationalists said. We must have the moral ability to choose God, even if our sin does earn us damnation when we reject God. Without free will, human salvation and damnation seemed not only irrational, but immoral.  ([367](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=367))

> Samuel Buell, one of the key leaders of the 1762-65 revival in New England and the Middle Colonies, would attempt to take up Edwards's mantle with his 1766 A Faithful Narrative of the Remarkable Revival of Religion, in the Congregation of East-Hampton, on Long-Island. Edwards's A Faithful Narrative would, if anything, become more popular among nineteenth-century American evangelicals. The New England and American Tract societies saw fit to print an excerpt from Edwards's A Faithful Narrative, recounting Abigail Hutchinson's conversion and saintly death; that tract went through eight editions beginning in 1816. Edwards's text has remained popular among evangelicals globally, through the present, as a model for what might be expected to happen in revival. For instance, a Korean translation of A Faithful Narrative was published in 1997, serving the thriving evangelical community in South Korea. Guy Chevreau's Catch the Fire (1995) used Edwards's revival narrative to help justify the outbreak of so-called holy laughter at the Toronto (Canada) Airport Fellowship, a key center of global charismatic renewal in the 199os.2s Though it followed in the train of earlier New England awakenings, Northampton's 1734-35 awakening has become the model revival of evangelicalism. Its publicity dramatically heightened expectations in Britain and America for new awakenings, and it provided a framework for local pastors to use to promote revival in their own congregations.  ([471](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=471))

> 3 "SOUL-SATISFYING SEALINGS OF GOD'S EVERLASTING LOVE": CONTINENTAL PIETISM, SCOTS-IRISH PRESBYTERIANISM, AND EARLY EVANGELICALISM In early 1720 a young Reformed minister disembarked from the King George in New York City and immediately began causing trouble in the Dutch Reformed churches of the Middle Colonies. He was Theodorus Jacobus Frelinghuysen, called to minister in the Raritan Valley of New Jersey. Frelinghuysen was not impressed with the established Reformed clergy of New York, just as he had not been with the Reformed clergy of Holland. In fact, he suspected that many pastors on both sides of the Atlantic remained unconverted, despite their cultivated religiosity. When Dominic Gualtherus DuBois invited Frelinghuysen to his home, Frelinghuysen commented unfavorably on the pastor's large wall mirror, saying that even "by the most far-stretched necessity" it could never be an appropriate indulgence for a minister of the gospel. The ascetic Frelinghuysen was willing to make enemies when he sensed hypocrisy. Moreover, he was prepared to assess whether anyone, even fellow pastors, had truly experienced the converting work of the Holy Spirit. In the 172os and 1730s, the Middle Colonies in North America-New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and New York, in particular-began to see more and more clergy like Frelinghuysen arrive from the Continent and cultivate a new affective Christianity. The Pietist "religion of the heart" and New England's developing expectation of revival became two of the three most important influences on early evangelicalism  ([479](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=479))

> Forms of European Continental Pietism flourished in the North American colonies during the eighteenth century, as its spiritual intensity combined with the relative freedom of many colonies that allowed Pietist churches proliferate. The two main branches of European Pietism, Reformed and Lutheran, were among the many religions of the heart generated by the Protestant Reformation. Holland had been an important seedbed for both English Puritanism and Reformed Pietism, with cross-fertilizing performed by English pastors like William Ames and Dutch clerics like Willem Teellinck, both of whom worked in England and Holland in the early seventeenth century. They helped develop the ideal of the individual's Christian life as fervently devoted to God and to self-sacrificial ministry. Faith did not equal assent to propositions about God; it was an affective commitment of one's whole being to God. True faith, as opposed to formal religiosity, was only given by God as a miraculous gift to the sinner. In these emphases, early Reformed Pietism and Puritanism shared much in common. In the mid-seventeenth century, however, New England Puritanism and Reformed Pietism began to take somewhat different, if still friendly, paths. Roughly speaking, Reformed Pietism became more concerned with heart religion and Christian practice, whereas Puritanism became more focused on doctrinal and ecclesiastical purity. In New England, Puritans became heavily invested in creating a sustainable church-state order that would preserve the faithfulness of succeeding generations and the favorable political systems of Massachusetts and Connecticut. The Pietist strain remained within Puritanism, however, and such figures as Richard Baxter and Cotton Mather cultivated personal and intellectual connections between English Puritanism and Continental Pietism.'  ([487](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=487))

> Out of this rich mix of Reformed and Lutheran sources, Spener helped develop two of the most influential ideas that would soon become central to evangelicalism.' The first of these ideas was that devotional meetings should be used to encourage spiritual development outside of normal church meetings. Labadie had already begun holding these sorts of gatherings, but under Spener the small-group meetings expanded significantly. In 1670, at Frankfurt am Main, Spener inaugurated the collegia pietatis (gatherings for piety). During these, Spener would open with prayer, then read and speak on a passage from a devotional book, and finally lead group discussions. He tried to keep the conversations focused on edifying, devotional topics, not on theological controversies. As the group expanded, Spener increased lay participation, and soon the same type of assemblies began to appear in neighboring towns. Spener had successfully launched a method of small-group ministry that would become critical to the future of evangelicalism and in particular would shape John Wesley's Methodist movement.' Related to the idea of the devotional group was Spener's advocacy of church transformation through the renewal of individual hearts. ([501](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=501))

> Just how lightly to take them was an easier matter between English, Scots-Irish, German, and Dutch than it would be between European and African, or European and Native American. The religion of the heart tended, however, to bring people together across all manner of boundaries. After his near-death experience ([566](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=566))

> Many Scots-Irish and English Presbyterians in the Middle Colonies established these sorts of seminaries. The academies, sometimes comprising little more than a learned pastor meeting with a small group of young men, cultivated a domestic base for recruiting evangelical Presbyterian pastors. Among the most significant schools besides Tennent's were those of Log College graduates Samuel Blair, at Fagg's Manor, Pennsylvania (founded 1739), and Samuel Finley, at West Nottingham, Maryland (1744). The ([591](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=591))

> William Tennent Jr. remembered that the Freehold church "crouded with People of all Ranks and Orders" to hear John's passionate preaching. He recalled congregants "sobbing as if their Hearts would break, but without any public Out-cry; and some have been carry'd out of the Assembly (being overcome) as if they had been dead."26 William Jr. seems to have approved of emotional expressions ([614](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=614))

> majesty of Jehovah, were so inexpressibly great as entirely to overwhelm him, and he fell, almost lifeless, to the ground." As he lay motionless for a long time, the elders came to find him, and escorted the weakened pastor back to the church. Once he regained his ability to speak, he "began the most affecting and pathetic address that the congregation had ever received from him."'  ([632](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=632))

> Severely agitated, he nevertheless attempted to perform his next service, and when the time came for him to pray, all he could utter was "Lord have mercy upon me!" With this, his doubts flew away, "and an unspeakably joyful light shone in upon his soul, so that his spirit seemed to be caught up to the heavens, and he felt as though he saw God, as Moses did on the Mount, face to face, and was carried forth to him." Moreover, "on every page of the scriptures [Tennentl saw [God's] divinity inscribed in brightest colours." The sermon he gave resulted in the conversion of about thirty people, ([635](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=635))

> give numbers because he needed more time to discern the authenticity of conversions, but he wrote, "to all Appearance, both Old and Young, Males and Females, have been renewed.... Some Negroes I trust are made free in CHRIST; and more seem to be unfeignedly seeking after it."31 Like many early white evangelicals, William Tennent Jr. wrote about African American converts as a discrete category in the revivals. The revivalists conceded that African Americans shared in all humanity's need for renewal by Christ, but their separate mention reminds us of their profoundly unequal status, even if the radical implications of the gospel might suggest a spiritual kind of equality with European Americans.  ([639](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=639))

> Rowland's ministry in 1738-39 helped define the terms of the growing debate between what would be called the "New Side" (prorevivalist) and "Old Side" (antirevivalist) Presbyterians. Many in the Philadelphia Synod doubted the sufficiency of his Log College education, but Rowland and the Tennents thought that a basic education combined with the power of the Spirit were more than enough to qualify a man to minister. Many, moreover, recoiled at Rowland's and Gilbert Tennent's loose handling of presbytery boundaries. Some also worried that the sort of emotional outbreaks that Rowland encouraged led not to solid piety but to dangerous enthusiasm 38  ([676](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=676))

> When he asked the affected listeners why they cried out, they told him that "they saw Hell opening before them, and themselves ready to fall into it." The next month at Maidenhead Rowland met George Whitefield, who commented that "Much of the simplicity of Christ was discernible in [Rowland'sl behaviour. Blessed be God for sending forth such burning and shining lights in the midst of the thick darkness.."41 We can see from Rowland's ([692](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=692))

> Instead, local ministers like Rowland welcomed Whitefield but rarely expected Whitefield to do anything more than to generate excitement. The high point of Rowland's revival began on July 24, 1740 (Whitefield was then in South Carolina), which he called the "Times of most remarkable Power that I observed in these Towns." He ([697](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=697))

> Continental Pietism and Scots-Irish Presbyterianism helped condition the faith and practices of early American evangelicalism, just as English Puritanism did. Pietism contributed an intense focus on the heart, often in conflict with the decayed state of formal, established religion. Scots-Irish Presbyterianism supplied legions of pious immigrants, who often came expecting revival to occur, especially at communion field services. These traditions helped forge a new multiethnic revivalist cohort in the Middle Colonies. The Pietists and Presbyterians of those colonies had begun striving for awakenings well before the Grand Itinerant George Whitefield came on the scene.  ([703](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=703))

> 4 "PLENTIFUL EFFUSIONS OF GOD'S SPIRIT IN THESE PARTS": GEORGE WHITEFIELD COMES TO AMERICA George Whitefield has been described as a "pioneer in the commercialization of religion" and "Anglo-America's first religious celebrity, the symbol for a dawning modern age.."' These characterizations are undoubtedly true, and Whitefield was the most important figure in fomenting the massive awakenings of the 1740s in Britain and North America. His willingness to work with members of non-Anglican denominations marked a key innovation of the evangelical movement: deemphasizing denominationalism to serve the priority of the new birth. ([707](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=707))

> The Imitation of Christ by Thomas a Kempis and thinking that ([723](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=723))

> Once, as he read a play to his sister, he abruptly proclaimed, "Sister, God intends something for me which we know not of.... I think God will provide for me some way or other that we cannot comprehend." He did not know why he said these words, but "God afterwards showed me they came from Him."3 As ([724](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=724))

> it, "I was to see God on Mount Sinai, but was afraid to meet Him. This made a great impression upon me; and a gentlewoman to whom I told it, said, `George, this is a call from God."' The ([729](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=729))

> Whitefield made his way to Oxford, where he resisted the "excess of riot" practiced by his mates, who began to consider him "a singular odd fellow." Whitefield became even more intense as a poor, ascetic college student. Whitefield then made the acquaintance of the Oxford Methodists, including Charles and John Wesley. "My soul ... was athirst for some spiritual friends to lift up my hands when they hung down," he wrote, and he found them in the Methodists. Charles Wesley recommended to him August Hermann Francke's Against the Fear of Man and Henry Scougal's The Life of God in the Soul of Man. Whitefield wrote that he "never knew what true religion was" until he read Scougal, a leading Scottish divine of the late seventeenth century. True religion, he learned from Scougal, consisted of becoming a "new creature." He was so impressed that he began sending copies of the book to friends. Whitefield heatedly sought the new birth from that point on s Whitefield lurched from ([733](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=733))

> 5 THE DANGER OF AN UNCONVERTED MINISTRY: FRACTIOUS REVIVALISM IN THE MIDDLE COLONIES While Whitefield was in the South, the energized evangelical movement in the Middle Colonies continued to spark controversy. Another large revival began in early 1740 at Samuel Blair's church in Fagg's Manor, Pennsylvania. Blair was a native of Ireland and a Log College graduate. He settled in Fagg's Manor (New Londonderry) in 1739 and began an academy like the Log College, which trained a number of influential Presbyterian ministers, including Samuel Davies. Blair's congregation was composed almost entirely of Ulster immigrants. He recorded one of the most comprehensive accounts of any revival, deliberately similar to Edwards's Faithful Narrative, in A Short and Faithful Narrative, of the Late Remarkable Revival of Religion in the Congregation of New-Londonderry (1744). Blair recalled that when he arrived at Fagg's Manor, the "Nature and Necessity of the New Birth was little known or thought of." Professing Christians thought that morality was the essence of true religion, but many did not live up even to this standard, as "in publick Companies, especially at Weddings, a vain and frothy Lightness was apparent in the Deportment of many Professors: and in some Places very extravagant Follies, as Horse-running, Fiddling and Dancing, pretty much obtain'd on those Occasions.."' True religion was dying in Fagg's Manor.  ([900](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=900))

> 7 "THIS IS No OTHER THAN THE GATE OF HEAVEN": GEORGE WHITEFIELD IN NEW ENGLAND Although Edwards's Northampton awakening had definitely cooled by 1736, New Englanders had hardly given up on the possibility of a larger revival. Sudbury's pastor Israel Loring gave the Massachusetts election day sermon in 1737 and called on New Englanders to ask God for more seasons like Northampton's. Because the Holy Spirit created revival, "let us earnestly seek to God by Prayer, to pour him out upon us for that End." He found special encouragement in the Northampton awakening to think that God might be planning something great. "His People there, have had a marvellous Visit from the Lord of Hosts ... He has revived Religion marvellously among them, by pouring out his Spirit upon them.."'  ([1293](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=1293))

> 8 "BLOWING UP THE DIVINE FIRE": MASS REVIVALISM IN NEW ENGLAND, 1740-1741 Whitefield left Boston in October 1740, but the town's revivalists hardly let the awakenings wane. Nine days after Whitefield's farewell sermon, Benjamin Colman preached Souls Flying to Jesus Christ Pleasant and Admirable to Behold. Whitefield, the "singular servent and holy Youth," had led a revival that touched all quarters of Boston society. Now Colman and his revivalist colleagues hoped to secure the effects of Whitefield's tour, "clinching the Nails driven by the Master of Assemblies." Colman thought that the present revival represented a significant step in the prophesied conversion of the Gentile nations and hinted that it might signal the final days before the return of Christ: "But the Prophecy is daily fulfilling, and at Times in a more remarkable Measure; but more especially it will be so in the latter and more happy Days of the Church when the Calling of the Jews and the Fulness of the Gentiles shall come on. -The LORD hasten the promis'd Day."'  ([1455](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=1455))

> The debate over the revivals between Edwards and Chauncy has been seen as the most significant one of the First Great Awakening with good reason. But their debate was not the only one, and their positions did not define the only options within the larger debates over the awakenings. For instance, one of the earliest public debates over the awakenings matched Alexander Garden, the Anglican commissary of Charleston, South Carolina, against radical pastor Andrew Croswell of Second Church, Groton, Connecticut. In their debate, one can see the intercolonial contest over Whitefield's reputation. In Six Letters to the Rev. Mr. George White field (1740), Garden protested Whitefield's assertion that many Anglican clergy were preaching justification by good works instead of grace alone. In a reply to Garden, Croswell made the debate over Whitefield primarily a contest between Calvinism and Arminianism. ([1855](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=1855))

> 12 "THE GOSPEL IS NOT PREACHED HERE": THE CRISIS OF NEW ENGLAND SEPARATISM The passions of the revivals led not only to heated arguments and noisy exhortations, but to something even more threatening to religious establishments: church separations. Today, Protestant church splits occur frequently and can happen over seemingly any issue. Although they often deeply wound the people and churches involved, almost no one would claim that such splits subvert the social order. Instead, they reflect America's individualized approach to religious matters: if a church does not suit someone, he or she can easily leave it or start a new church. In the mid-eighteenth century, however, rejection of the church establishment's authority was viewed as a profoundly threatening act, jeopardizing the Christian order of society. Connecticut, in particular, passed a host of new laws designed to stop radical itinerants and the congregations they spawned. But the momentum of the awakenings was difficult to contain, and many enthusiasts seemed to thrive amidst persecution. Liberty of conscience became one of the rallying points of radical evangelicalism, especially as the movement entered the revolutionary period.  ([2647](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=2647))

> As Wheelock explained to George Whitefield, separating Indian children from tribal culture and educating them would be the most expedient way to train Indian missionaries. Native missionaries could most effectively and inexpensively reach fellow Indians with the gospel. In addition to turning them to Christ, Native evangelization would help "remove their Prejudices, attach them to the English; & to the Crown of great Brittain," and save them from "the subtle Insinuations of great Numbers of Jesuits" trying to convert them to Catholicism and the French national interest 46  ([3135](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=3135))

> 14 "ETHIOPIA SHALL STRETCH OUT HER HANDS UNTO GOD": SLAVERY, AFRICAN AMERICANS, AND EVANGELICALISM The itinerant Daniel Rogers recorded an April 1743 conversation with a woman in York, Maine, who "told me she had a View of ye Coming of ye King-dome of God, and p[ar)ticularly of ye Negroes being brot into It." They agreed that Psalm 68:31 ("Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands unto God.") had been "fulfilled in the Conversion of many poor Negroe slaves in N. Eng(lan)d." He hoped these conversions would represent the "first Fruits" of a general awakening among Africans extending to the "West Indies and East." But other whites feared the power of evangelical blacks, as exemplified in a bizarre story in the Boston Weekly Post-Boy in 1742. ([3204](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=3204))

> A report from Colchester, Connecticut, told that after a revival meeting, "a Negro Man, who, 'tis said, was Converted, endeavour'd to exhort in the Congregation; but being oppos'd by some, he withdrew into an Orchard near the Meeting-House, where many of the Congregation follow'd him; and as he was exhorting the People, two large monstrous black Snakes crept up on his Back, and look'd over each of his Shoulders to the great Surprize both of himself and his Audience: They kill'd the Snakes, and dismiss'd the Exhorter for that Night." The conversion of African Americans could signal the coming of the kingdom of God or the rise of malevolent spirits, depending upon one's perspective. According to antirevivalist Charles Chauncy, however, one of the most disconcerting features of the revivals was that "Women and Girls; yea, Negroes, have taken upon them to do the Business of Preachers.."'  ([3208](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=3208))

> He believed that during the millennium, "many of the Negroes and Indians will be divines, and that excellent books will be published in Africa, in Ethiopia, [and] in Turkey" ([3261](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=3261))

> Whitefield's 1740 "A Letter to the Inhabitants of Maryland, Virginia, North and South Carolina" chastised slave owners for abusing their slaves and for failing to evangelize them. Whitefield suspected that the masters had withheld Christianity from the slaves for fear that it would make them subversive. The evangelist thought, to the contrary, that Christianity taught people to accept their station in life, so that a Christian African would make a good slave. Whitefield showed particular attention to blacks on his tours and demonstrated at least a fleeting interest in educating African Americans. But he also came to own a South Carolina plantation worked by slaves, which would provision the Bethesda orphanage. In the 1750s the itinerant pushed for the legalization of slavery in Georgia 10  ([3264](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B001DA0UVA&location=3264))
Add a note