The reason you are doubting the solutions you’ve been handed by the left is that your instincts are telling you that something has been hidden from you. Your instincts are correct. Huge chunks of history were left out of our education — first by our public or private mainstream schools, and later by our lefty courses in college and their approved left wing reading lists. 

On some level, you already have sensed that the sum of all the history you were taught doesn’t quite add up. In high school they taught us a history picked clean of all meaning by corporate textbook producers. In college, the lefties taught us about colonization, slavery, wars, abuses of corporate power, and a few of the many famous protest movements that resisted. But they hid from us The Dream of Humanity, The Revolution, The Story of Democracy, The Republic and supporting institutions such as the rule of law, the competent and accountable state, religions of equality and justice, and so much more.

Where do we start? Let’s start with what came first: The Dream. 

From long before the first sign of civilization up until just 100 years ago, all humanity used to share a common dream. It was there at the creation of the first states and the first religions, it was at the core of every literature, and it was in every code of law. In modern times, an updated version of the dream was the basis of almost every modern social movement.

The dream was simple: One day everyone would (A) be free and (B) have enough land to live well. The dream was born, predictably enough, when the first people found themselves (A) unfree and (B) landless — which happened somewhere between seven and fifteen thousand years ago according the people who study that sort of thing. 

Before that, everyone belonged to a community and every community controlled its own land. And that’s the way it had been for millions of years of human and prehuman development. 
For that entire time, we lived in groups of less than 100 individuals who made their living by foraging and hunting. Our original way of life was no utopia. We competed just as vigorously as we cooperated. Our amazing capacity to love and care for each other was matched by only by our capacity to kill and torture our own kind, in a manner almost unprecedented among animals. 

One thing, though, is certain: For all those millions of years, no one was master and no one was slave. That wasn’t because people were more enlightened before civilization got ahold of them. It was practical, physical, logistical. You gained nothing by trying to coerce someone into gathering berries for you. Gathering food usually wasn’t very hard and, besides, you didn’t have anything else to do. Social status was partly determined by food you brought to the group, so if you were big and strong enough to dominate your peers, you might as well go hunting and bring back some meat instead of wasting your time trying to get them to do it for you. Moreover, very little food that could be gathered would last very long. There was no value in building up a treasure in mushy, rotting berries. The physical facts of life were therefore enough to prevent any one person or clique from exploiting others.

Then we developed agriculture. Farming brought all kinds of drastic changes to human life. For millions of years, babies had been spaced about five years apart. Now, for a whole bunch of weird little reasons, they were spaced every two years or so. After agriculture, most people became malnourished, but tended to have access to more calories. People groups now became truly nomadic. Hunter gatherers had paced well defined territories. Early farmers, however, quickly depleted land and have to move on to consume brand new territory. This is when humans first deforested huge chunks of the earth and started wiping out whole species.  

Farmers maintained a pretty egalitarian and communal way of life for the first several thousand years of agriculture. (Though, again, this is not to say they lived in anything resembling a utopia.) But the potential for exploitation now existed. Once storable, surplus food existed, it could be captured by a force of bullies and kept from the rest of the community, then used to fuel a new bully/producer division of labor.

Whether it took humans all that time to discover exploitation, or whether they actively resisted it, we’ll never know. All we know is that eventually some group of bullies figured out how to turn their former family and friends into proto-peasants, overcoming whatever resistance their community might have offered, and thereby unleashing a new way of life that still dominates our species. 

Once the pandora’s box of exploitation had been opened, history’s pace increased. It was a small step for a group of bullies who had captured their own community, to go next door and capture another. Soon a huge chunk of the globe, and a majority of humanity, lived under some form of exploitative tyranny. 

That’s when the dream was born. People did not simply dream of return to the Garden of Eden of forager life. They remembered on some level that such a life hadn’t quite been paradise. They dreamed forward, not backward, to win control by the community back over the land as it now was and all the new cultural and technological developments that had transformed human life. They saw a new kind of cosmopolitan humanity taking shape, a new way of being human, and they wanted in. 

The dream refined itself in the oral histories and literatures created by the people. Even when the dream had no practical chance of coming true, every tyrant had to negotiate with it — in the edicts of priests, the subtle hints of trusted servants and the occasional rebellion or riot. The dream left its mark on the new humanity: It was there at the founding every major religion, it was at the core of every literature, and it crept into ever code of law. Most importantly, the act of dreaming the dream — singing it, worshiping it, passing it on —  gave people a way to remain human, even in those times when almost every human characteristic was being forcibly stripped from them. 

Men with swords and horses, then planes and bombs, and then manufacturing and media empires all tried to kill the dream. But it always bounced back into the forefront of world history through reformations, renaissances and revolutions. As the economy evolved, so did it. Just as how farmers didn’t want to go back to foraging, workers didn’t want to go back to farming. Industrial workers didn’t dream of reclaiming the land, they dreamed of reclaiming the industrial economy that their hands had built. 

As millennia passed, the dreamers seemed to gain more and more power. Finally, about one hundred years ago, it all seemed to be happening — the dream seemed right within reach of becoming true. Hundreds of millions of people on every inhabited continent were marching, organizing, fighting and building in a fairly unified mass movement of international solidarity. 
Humanity had always kept its eye on the prize: control over the means of making a living by the community. The means of making was no longer just land, but a vast industrial system. The community was now all of humanity together.

By the 20th century, the dream had fully transcended particular religions and regions, all humanity was holding it up together as one. Tens of thousands of farmers and workers organizations coordinated with each other in what they thought was the end game to realize the dream. They shared a common vocabulary and imagery of struggle. On the same appointed days, all over the globe, millions of people sang the same songs and held the same banners in one hundred languages — not because they were forced to conform, but because they chose solidarity, because they chose the dream of a united humanity. 

They shared a theoretical understanding of how everything was supposed to go. Everything seemed to be going perfectly according to plan. 

And then, with no warning and with unrelenting force, the 20th century put the dream through a meat grinder. It’s a long, terrible story with rivers of blood and mountains of bone. When it was all over, no one could talk about the dream without getting sick. That story is the most amazing story in all of human history. I’ll tell it to you. But to understand it — and to understand what we are to do with it — I need to tell you a handful of other stories first. 

What this book is about, though, is picking that dream back up. What I’m suggesting is: if you are one of those selected by God or history or your grandmother’s bedtime stories to be a Dreamer, then your confusion about what to do with your life will only end when you commit your life to the dream of a fully liberated humanity.

And the good news is that fully liberating humanity is possible — in your life time. Really. I promise, just read on. 

### [[NEXT: It's like Communism in there!|The Revolution Misses You/It's like Communism in there!]]