# South Africa's Suspended Revolution: Hopes and Prospects
by Adam Habib

_(Last annotated on July 9, 2014)_

> This time Zuma, as presidential incumbent, was the focus of the attempted ejection. His nemeses were his onetime allies, Julius Malema, Fikile Mbalula, Mathews Phosa, Tokyo Sexwale, and even Kgalema Motlanthe. Malema was effectively fired as president of the Youth League through the mechanism of the ANC's disciplinary committee. In December 2012, Motlanthe, who was deputy president of both the ruling party and the country at the time, stood against Zuma for the presidency of the ANC at the party's national conference in Mangaung. He lost, and having withdrawn from the candidature for the party's deputy-presidency in favour of Tokyo Sexwale and Mathews Phosa, Motlanthe was effectively cast into the political wilderness. His role in the ANC has been confined to heading up political education within the party. Cyril Ramaphosa, billionaire, the second-richest black businessman in the country, (location 65)

> Even though he won so many votes, Zuma cannot afford to be sanguine about his situation. The reason for this is that his opposition, although small, is mainly located in Gauteng province - the economic heartland of the country. As fourth largest contributor to Africa's GDP, this economic hub has to be central to any economic revitalisation and transformation agenda. Its inclusion in the alliance of the `forces for change' must be of concern to him. Moreover, his internal opposition involve people of means. Tokyo Sexwale and Mathews Phosa have enormous financial resources at their disposal. (location 72)

> Throughout this period the drama has been broadcast live. The South African media has insisted on providing the nation with front-row seats to the unfolding spectacle. In the process, the ANC, the political home of Nobel laureates Albert Luthuli and Nelson Mandela, has been seen for what it is increasingly becoming: a grubby instrument of enrichment that speaks the language of empowerment and democracy, while its leadership and cadres plunder the nation's resources and undermine both the judiciary and the media - the former because it may be used to hold various actors to account, and the latter for having the temerity to broadcast the drama.  (location 80)

> `I am an African' speech, was delivered to the Constituent Assembly in 1996 in his capacity as deputy president of the Republic. (location 98)

> It was also a speech that celebrated the Afrikaner rebellion against English imperialism (the Anglo-Boer War) as much as it did tribal resistance to settler encroachment, and the more recent resistance to apartheid (Mbeki, 1996). The (location 100)

> Thus, while water, electricity and communications infrastructure was being expanded, the introduction of a new cost-recovery model meant that millions of people were denied access to water and power because of their inability to pay for these services (McDonald and Pape, 2002). In addition, although GEAR may have facilitated economic growth and allowed some to benefit enormously, it left millions unemployed. The middle classes expanded dramatically, with the rise of black professionals and the appointment of black civil servants. A small politically connected black business elite also emerged, largely from politically brokered and state-financed transfers of corporate ownership. The net effect was that while poverty first increased and then decreased, levels of inequality have risen consistently throughout the post-apartheid era. In my view, this particular feature of the transition contributed to Mbeki's downfall at Polokwane.  (location 119)

> As Mark Gevisser (2007) convincingly argues, Mbeki's support base was always among the intelligentsia, and the urban middle and upper-middle classes, mainly within the black community and to some extent among the white population. (location 123)

> This grouping, especially its black component, constituted a significant proportion of the activist and leadership base of the ANC, and for years they constituted Mbeki's primary support base. (location 125)

> Three influential scholarly works grounded within this methodological perspective have been published on the South African transition, each offering a distinctive explanation of how South Africa got to where it is now. Two of these, Why Race Matters in South Africa (MacDonald, 2006), and Class Race and Inequality in South Africa (Seekings and Nattrass, 2006), were published soon after South Africa's new democracy celebrated its tenth anniversary, while the third, Pushed to the Limit (Marais, 2011) came out after Jacob Zuma ascended to the presidency. All three offer macro-studies of South Africa, and attempt to explain the overall dynamics and outcomes of the transition. All three critique the transition's current trajectory and recommend or imply alternative policies and agendas.  (location 205)

> Like the apartheid state, the ANC was confronted with two options: transform the socio-economic system or find a way of accommodating the interests of capital. MacDonald argues that, given the power of the corporate sector, the ANC chose the latter. But, he maintained, the ANC was then confronted with the problem of how to legitimise the system? Its answer, he argues, was to deracialise the apex of corporate power by creating a black bourgeoisie and upper-middle class (2oo6: 124-16o). This, however, would only work if the interests of black elites could pass as being identical to those of the black population as a whole. The only way this could be done, MacDonald argues, was by advancing a culturalist conception of politics, one more typical of representatives of apartheid South Africa, where nation was conceived of as originating in culture defined, of course, in terms of race. (location 217)

> that is, nationhood was conceived as originating in a common experience of oppression. The practical consequences of the ANC's shift away from this tradition `is the reifying of racial identities, its repudiation of the principles of non-racialism, and its abandonment of the construction of a non-racial people' (2 oo6: 174).  (location 224)

> strong continuity in public policy between the late-apartheid and post-apartheid periods, effectively making the case that the overall increase in inequalities in South Africa was not simply a matter of inheritance, but also the product of policy choices made by the political elites under the new democratic dispensation. Their argument is essentially that the post-apartheid `distributional regime' - their term for the mix of economic growth path and public policies on education, the labour market, and social welfare which together structure income patterns in South Africa - incorporates significant features of its late-apartheid predecessor, with similar results and consequences. (location 228)

> the beneficiary community has broadened from capital and white workers only, to include black industrial workers. The costs of this growth strategy have been borne by the large pool of unskilled labour: the primary victims of apartheid's distributional regime have now become the underclasses of post-apartheid South Africa (2 oo6: 300-339)-  (location 232)

> (COSATU, 20o6: 24).  (location 249)

> But were South Africa's corporatist institutions and traditions as strong as they assumed when Seekings and Nattrass put forward their proposals? As discussed in Chapter Four, a careful assessment of the outcomes of these institutions, and a reading of the broader literature, suggests that this was really not the case. After (location 261)

> Indeed, they go so far as to describe employed workers as a privileged group and as among the winners in the transition (2006: 46, 374). But as Franco Barchiesi (2011: 206) demonstrates, the precariousness of their jobs, the `uneven and fragile' nature of the benefits that they have gained, and the fact that `democratisation and racial redress have largely not reversed the injuries of unilateral corporate power', means that unionised black workers cannot be `conceived among the winners of the post-apartheid transition' or as being `on the way to become a prosperous middle class'.  (location 273)

> There are a number of cases across the world, such as the Scandinavian countries or western Europe more generally, and even the Asian Tigers - Japan, South Korea and Taiwan - in which economic and political elites have been prompted to choose a human-oriented development trajectory. Does it not make sense, then, to establish a research agenda on the politics of policy making, with the express aim of trying to understand under what conditions elites can be made to behave in systemically beneficial ways?  (location 281)

> Hein Marais's Pushed to the Limit (2011), which has a very different philosophical tenor. The essential thesis of this sequel to his earlier work, Limits to Change (2001), is that South Africa's democratic transition is merely an attempt by the ruling class to establish a new growth path after its previous attempts in the late-apartheid period failed to address the economic crisis that overcame the country from the 1970s. His view is that the ruling class gave the ANC a mandate to deliver stable and (location 284)

> sustainable economic growth in exchange for a limited redress project that involved the creation of a black capitalist class (2011: 389). (location 287)

> Marais' view, Zuma's ascendancy to the leadership was an attempt by the party to re-establish its hold over the citizenry (2011: 403). (location 291)

> Indeed, Marais notes that the ANC's rule is less stable than it was a decade ago and anticipates the continuation of social struggles (2011: 400-403). Marais suggests, however, that these do not constitute as coherent a rebellion as many activists imagine, but remain sporadic and isolated. He concludes by arguing that progressives have to prepare for a long and arduous road of `experimenting, building and adapting' (2011: 460).  (location 293)

> First, he explicitly suggests that capital is trying to reconstruct its hegemonic project and that the ANC is a junior partner in this regard. This projects a level of coherence onto the corporate sector that is just not evident. (location 296)

> Moreover, the ANC is not a junior partner in the initiative. Indeed, it is the pre-eminent actor, even though it is constrained by the balance of power, (location 298)

> Second, Marais does not sufficiently recognise the subtle shifts in the balance of power that resulted from developments at the Polokwane conference. This may be because he seems to be seeking substantive ruptures rather than subtle shifts. Although dramatic for the key actors in the drama, Polokwane led to a relatively subtle shift in the balance of power, manifested in the enhancement in the leverage capacity of organised labour and in increased levels of uncertainty within the business community. These shifts create the potential for different outcomes, even if these may not be revolutionary in nature. In addition, Marais is not sufficiently cognisant of the differences between the Mbeki and Zuma administrations. Yet, as I indicate in Chapter Three, there are important economic programmes that the Zuma administration is either pioneering or deepening, and while some of these may have emerged since the publication of his book, Marais's analysis clearly did not anticipate the left-leaning agenda implicit in these initiatives. (location 301)

> These are the only kinds of changes that are feasible for the moment but they hold the potential of slowly altering South Africa's future.  (location 311)

> Similarly, albeit in a very different ideological vein, Collier and Collier (1991) explained the political systems in eight Latin American countries as a product of attempts to incorporate the working class into their societies. The number of workers had grown dramatically through the first half of the twentieth century. However, the specific forms (location 333)

> integration attempted in each country were dependent `on the dynamics of intra-elite politics and choices by actors within the state' (Collier and Collier, 1991). Both studies therefore integrated structural and agential variables in their analyses of regime transitions.  (location 335)

> The post-apartheid state's dismal record in terms of service delivery is explored with attention being given to the powers of different tiers of government, the particular character of affirmative action, the effects of cadre and factional deployment, as well as corruption. I end the chapter by identifying the essence of the accountability and service-delivery challenges facing the post-apartheid state.  (location 367)

> (Lijphart, 1985: 20;36).3 Majoritarian democracy, he maintained, would be catastrophic for the country. It would promote civil strife and undermine the stability of post-apartheid South Africa. He therefore recommended a consociational democratic system for the country, including elements of power sharing, the proportional allocation of public resources and civil-service positions, and a federal state (1985). Lijphart's vision became the National Party's constitutional platform. The party proposed a three-tier government with legislative and executive authority at all levels. It insisted on the establishment of a constitutional state governed by a charter of fundamental rights that would guarantee the independence of the judiciary, ombudsman, auditor-general, public service commission and the Reserve Bank (South African Government, n.d.) It also demanded security of tenure for civil-service employees (NP, n.d; South African Government, n.d.). For the National Party, participatory democracy, interpreted as power sharing, was to be reflected in a bicameral parliament, the first elected by universal suffrage based on proportional representation, and the second to be composed of equal numbers of seats for all regions. (location 446)

> The ANC's proposals, on the other hand, were influenced by traditions of democracy as theorised and practised in much of the Anglo-Saxon world. On the basis of these traditions, which were consistent with the majoritarian elements of the ANC's earlier national democratic vision, the organisation rejected power sharing in favour of majority rule. The ANC recognised the rights of minorities, but maintained that these could be protected through a bill of rights and a system of proportional representation. (location 454)

> categories. Democracy, according to the ANC, essentially meant that the views and decisions of the majority must prevail within society. They argued that minority parties should accept this and try, through vigorous opposition, to attract new voters who would enable them to develop into a majority (ANC, n.d).  (location 457)

> consociational (location 470)

> After the unbanning of the ANC, the National Party put forward its neo-liberal economic agenda in (location 814)

> The Restructuring of the South African Economy: A Normative Model Approach (Central Economic Advisory Services, 1993). (location 815)

> later, in an engagement with corporate executives in the United Kingdom, he spoke out against it (Financial (location 821)

> The ANC's proposals were perhaps most coherently articulated in the reports published by the Macro Economic Research Group (MERG) and the Industrial Strategy Project, which were then the economic `think tanks' of the Tripartite Alliance.' MERG advanced a ten-year plan with two distinct (location 824)

> These fiscal gains came at a devastating social cost, however. As indicated earlier, levels of inequality and poverty increased dramatically in the years immediately after the adoption of GEAR, although poverty levels have since reduced slightly since the early 2ooos. The presidency's (location 858)

> How can we explain the ANC government's abandonment of its developmental vision? Two broad explanations have been offered. The first, preferred paradoxically by elements on both the left and the liberal right, focuses on state elites. Many left-wing critics believe that the (location 864)

> abandonment of the wish for the total defeat and suppression of the class forces responsible for apartheid', and suggested instead the development of `a dialectical relationship with private capital as a social partner for development and social progress' (ANC, 1996: 22). Mbeki was not alone in this view. Hein Marais too makes the point by quoting Gramsci, `change happens (location 876)

> Political polarisation begins The implementation of GEAR had devastating consequences not only for the citizenry, but also for the political evolution of South Africa. Essentially its implementation polarised the political spectrum. On the one hand, its consequences (either directly, or mediated through departmental policies it spawned, such as the policy on cost-recovery related to basic (location 916)

> and was beginning to pursue a more interventionist, state-led economic strategy. Some academics had already arrived at this conclusion. For instance, as early as 2001, Vishnu Padayachee and Imraan Valodia (location 943)

> Nationalists in the ANC, such as Billy Masetlha, Tony Yengeni, as well as Julius Malema and others within the Youth League (some say supported by wealthy beneficiaries of black economic empowerment), are concerned about the influence of communism (Letsoalo and Tabane, 2009). COSATU and the SACP, on the other hand, are concerned that the nationalists are increasingly motivated by the narrow aspirations of black economic empowerment as evidenced by their support for Bobby Godsell in the Eskom fallout with its CEO, Jacob Maroga (SABC News, 9/11/2009; SAPA, 10/11/2009).19  (location 1113)

> But given that black economic empowerment has helped him to become the second-richest black businessman in South Africa, and that he was implicated in the Marikana tragedy by his shareholding and his representation on the board of the mining company, Lonmin, he may be too politically tainted to bridge the factional divides within the ruling party.  (location 1125)

> 4 The viability of a sustainable social pact Social pacts have become a mantra of South Africa's political transition. Ever since the notion was mooted by Geoff Schreiner (1991; 1994) and Adrienne Bird (Bird and Schreiner, 1992), who were then senior officials in the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU), the idea of a social pact has appealed to leadership figures in business, labour and the state. It is not difficult to imagine why. After all, a social pact promises the possibility of peace between warring (location 1145)

> South Africa's democratic transition, like those of most `Third Wave democracies' (Huntington, 1991), has been characterised by two distinct transitional processes: political democratisation and economic liberalisation. The goal of the first is representative government. The aim of the second is the integration of South Africa into the global economy. From the early 199os, COSATU's leadership was refreshingly aware of the dilemmas spawned by this Janus-faced transition, and during the first few years of the negotiations period, they groped their way towards a new strategic vision.  (location 1166)

> ANC's abandonment of its Reconstruction and Development Programme, high levels of political instability and increasing industrial strife. Scenario two called the `Skorokoro' (local slang for a clapped-out old vehicle) was distinguished by economic growth and modest delivery. In this option, racial divisions were imagined as likely to continue, but the black middle class would be empowered. The third scenario, known as `Pap, vleis and gravy' (local slang for meat with all the trimmings), was defined as massive growth and development, with significant job creation and the delivery of services by the state as outlined in the Reconstruction and Development Programme. In this scenario, unions were imagined as engaging in joint decision making with business. The September Commission viewed a combination of scenarios two and three as most likely outcomes for South Africa and argued for a programme of social unionism so as to increase the trade union movement's influence on the political and socio-economic outcomes of the transition. In the words of the Commission, social unionism is `the strategy which will enable COSATU to... proactively contest the transition... The aim is to harness the organised power of COSATU, its capacity to mobilise, its socio-economic programmes and policies and its participation in political and social alliances to make important contributions to national, economic and social development' (COSATU, 1997). This was envisaged as occurring through COSATU's participation in the ANC and the Tripartite Alliance, in state institutions (including parliament and national, provincial (location 1171)

> For a short while, it seemed South Africa might defy the odds and that social unionism would succeed. But this was not to last. The symbolic turning point was the adoption of the GEAR programme, which occurred just before the September Commission published its (location 1220)

> GEAR violated all three of the central tenets of social unionism. First, it bypassed corporatist structures and was imposed by Cabinet without any discussion with the social partners (Adam et al., 1997; Alexander, 2002; Bond, 2000; Marais, 2001). Even President Mandela acknowledged this in his speech at COSATU's sixth national congress, saying `It was unfortunate that here in GEAR we did not have sufficient consultation with other members of the alliance. In fact even the ANC learnt of GEAR when it was almost complete... We ignored those who put us in power' (Mandela, 1997). Second, GEAR's economic strategy violated the ethos of compromise that forms the hallmark of social unionism (Adler and Webster, 1995; see also Webster and Adler, 1999). And third, its passage indicated that the Tripartite Alliance was ineffective as a mechanism for ensuring COSATU's influence on the ANC. Indeed, (location 1222)

> of GEAR were catastrophic for workers. Between 1985 and 2002, the share of workers' wages as a percentage of GDP declined significantly from 57.1 per cent in 1985 to 51.4 per cent in 2002. In the same period, profit share increased from 42.9 per cent to 51.4 per cent (Gelb, 2003: 21).' This trend was consolidated (location 1231)

> context of the economic and political climate of the 199os were brushed aside as `ultra-leftist' and `academic' (Callinicos, 1992; Desai and Habib, 1994; Habib, 1997), although these too could have been more contextually grounded. As things turned out, the social pacts unravelled, the unions' political influence was weakened, and poverty and inequality increased. If this outcome is to be reversed, and attempts are to be made to launch a new social pact, it is imperative to understand the conditions under which social pacts emerge and succeed.  (location 1263)

> first, known as the historical continuity school, focused primarily on examples from Latin America. It argued that corporatist political initiatives in that region have their roots in a political culture that is historically grounded in hierarchy, status, and patronage. One of the more noted scholars from this school, Howard Wiarda (1981) argued that there is a distinct continuity between the pre - and post-colonial periods in Latin American nations; that is, that the nature of the society and the substantive character of the political and constitutional order extended, in an adapted form, from the pre-colonial into the post-colonial period. Thus, corporatism was conceived as having its roots in an elitist, historical, and authoritarian heritage and has having been imparted to the region by its colonial powers.  (location 1267)

> The potential for a social pact in the post-Polokwane era Is a social pact feasible in the post-Polokwane period? After all, as indicated in Chapter One, COSATU and the SACP are now in far more powerful positions. To briefly reiterate: the balance of power in South African politics changed significantly as a result of developments at the ANC's national electoral congress held at Polokwane in 2007. Mbeki's defeat and Zuma's victory installed a new governing alliance at the helm of the ANC and the state. COSATU, the SACP, and the left within the ANC constituted one of the more important, if not the core institutional elements within this political alliance, and their leverage within the state and its economic institutions has increased significantly.  (location 1321)

> The major political contest within formal civil society seemed to be between pro-apartheid institutions such as the Broederbond and the Nederduitse Gereformeerde Kerk on the one hand and liberal-oriented organisations such as the Institute of Race Relations and the National Union of South African Students on the other.' As the 1970s approached, anti-apartheid NGOs including trade unions and an array of organisations associated with the Black Consciousness Movement began to make their presence felt (Friedman, 1987; Marx, 1992).' However, (location 1476)

> (Sparks, 199o).1 (location 1489)

> Much of this analysis was reaffirmed in another study on social movements edited by William Beinart and Marcelle Dawson (2010) involving students from the University of Oxford. These researchers argued that while post-apartheid social movements `echoed apartheid era mass mobilisation by being rooted in poor communities in the townships, sustaining a culture of discussion, (location 1589)

> investment (Daniel, Naidoo and Naidu, 2003). (location 1814)

> three principles, namely: respect for sovereignty, the responsibility to protect citizens, and the need for systemic reform within the world's multilateral organisations. These principles must be seen as indivisible and should not be engaged with selectively. The principles are not mutually exclusive, and trading one off against the others delegitimises the whole system, thereby retarding the struggle for the realisation of human rights throughout the world and for the equitable development of all nations.  (location 2020)

> South Africa's international engagement under Jacob Zuma has been defined by this same strategic orientation, although the new administration has attempted to compensate for the rights deficit that its implementation entailed under Mbeki. The failure of its strategy in Libya, including the overthrow and subsequent murder of Gaddafi as well as NATO's success in effecting regime change, provoked a degree of soul searching on the country's foreign policy and strategy. (location 2028)

> country's foreign policy - requires both a respect for sovereignty and a rights regime for citizens. Trading one off against the other is likely to ultimately compromise this goal. Is it therefore not essential to think more creatively so that the principles of sovereignty and human rights can be pursued simultaneously, and the collective empowerment of the citizens of the world can become a realisable objective?  (location 2033)

> Rosa Luxemburg's essay, Social Reform or Revolution (1900), was about her intellectual battle (with Eduard Bernstein) to ensure that reforms were not divorced from revolution, but rather conceived as part of a continuum of struggle culminating in the latter. Similarly, Leon Trotsky grappled with this dilemma in his programme of transitional reforms (Trotsky, 1938/1981), (location 2058)

> `Left Wing Communism: An Infantile Disorder' (192o/1964). But perhaps the greatest of the socialist theorists on this issue was Italian communist Antonio Gramsci, whose notion of `hegemony' provided the intellectual inspiration for much of the European left in the second half of the twentieth century.  (location 2060)

> One of the earliest conceptual exercises addressing this question in relation to post-apartheid South Africa was undertaken by John Saul (1991) who, following Boris Kagarlitsky (1990), made the case for what he termed `structural reform'. Saul defined structural reform as having a snowball effect, thus facilitating further reforms that collectively constitute a project of self transformation. (location 2072)

> P.In part two of a controversial discussion document released by its central committee in May 2006, entitled `Class Struggles and the Post-1994 State in South Africa', the organisation argues that `if it is to have any prospect of addressing the dire legacy of colonial dispossession and apartheid oppression, a national democratic strategy has to be revolutionary, that is to say, it must systemically transform class, racial and gendered power' (SACP, 20o6b: 28).  (location 2080)

> Within the Tripartite Alliance, and sometimes even outside it, excessive focus has been placed on the role of agency and an inordinate amount of time is therefore spent on ensuring that the `right people' get into positions of influence in both the ruling party and state institutions. As (location 2084)

> Slabbert Commission, which (location 2094)

> Constitution (Electoral Task Team, 2003: 12-30).' This recommendation reflected a popular view that while the national-list and proportional-representation system is fair and representative, it does not hold individual parliamentarians accountable to voters (Mattes and Southall, 2004). The express purpose of the Slabbert Commission's proposal was to enhance the influence of citizens on their representatives. The implementation of its recommendations had the potential to contribute to a political system that generates substantive uncertainty for the political elites. Unfortunately, the view of the majority of commission members was contested in a minority report, which favoured the status quo (Electoral Task Team, 2003: 62-73). The recommendations of the minority report were ultimately accepted by the African National Congress (ANC) government.'  (location 2096)

> This requires the emergence of a viable opposition party which, as Courtney Jung and Ian Shapiro (1995: 272-273) argue, is important in (i) providing a site where critics can coalesce and organise; (ii) facilitating a peaceful transfer of political office; (iii) protecting the democratic order from being delegitimated when citizens are unhappy, and (iv) enabling a variety of public-interest functions including the monitoring of government performance and corruption. As (location 2101)

> At present, South Africa has all of the institutional characteristics of a robust democratic political order, yet its political system is entirely uncompetitive. The ANC overwhelmingly dominates electoral support. (location 2105)

Note: compare to japan during rapid econ dev

> More importantly, the largest opposition parties are unable to seriously compete with the ruling party because their support base is largely confined to South Africa's minority groups. Thus, it can be argued that a viable political system does not yet exist in South Africa and there is no prospect of one emerging from the collection of parties represented in the national parliament (Habib and Taylor, 2001).  (location 2106)

> (Habib and Taylor, 2001: 222).  (location 2112)

>
