# 1 DREAMS OF LIBERATION

> IN 1756 the people of Virginia lived in fear. A year earlier General Edward Braddock had marched against the French and Indians on the colony’s western frontier. Braddock had been overwhelmed, and now Virginians faced invasion. The Reverend Samuel Davies summoned them to battle, lest “Indian savages and French Papists, infamous all the World over for Treachery and Tyranny, should rule Protestants and Britons with a Rod of iron.” Virginians, Davies was sure, would never give up their freedom. *“Can you bear the Thought,” he asked them, “that Slavery should clank her Chain in this Land of Liberty?”* 1 British troops turned back the French, and Virginia was spared enslavement to papists and savages. Yet in that “Land of Liberty” even as Davies spoke, two-fifths of all the people were in fact already enslaved, under the iron rule of masters who were “Protestants and Britons.” Twenty years later the people of Virginia were again in peril. The mother country, having saved them from the French, now herself threatened to reduce them to slavery through the devious method of Parliamentary taxation. With the other English colonies in America they sprang to arms, to determine, as Edmund Pendleton put it, “whether we shall be slaves.” 2 George Washington, who had helped to fight off enslavement to papists, prepared to fight again and grieved that “the once happy and peaceful plains of America are either to be drenched with Blood, or inhabited by Slaves.” It was, he thought, a sad alternative. But, he asked, “Can a virtuous Man hesitate in his choice?” 3 Washington led his countrymen in arms, while another Virginian led them in a Declaration of Independence that founded the American republic. The starting point of that document, the premise on which it rested, was that all men are created equal and endowed by their Creator with inalienable rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. At the time when Thomas Jefferson wrote those words, he was personally depriving nearly two hundred men, women, and children of their liberty. When he died, on the fiftieth anniversary of his great Declaration, he still owned slaves, probably more than two hundred. When Washington faced his sad alternative, the happy and peaceful plains of Virginia had been inhabited by slaves for more than a century, and 135 of them belonged to him. When he died, he was master of John Ponet, who had once been bishop of Winchester, offered his countrymen a multitude of examples from the Bible and from ancient history of people who had rightly resisted wicked rulers. But he also interspersed a few pointed modern references, as of the wicked, idolatrous Prince Eglon,

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 186-188). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

> After Elizabeth succeeded Mary on the English throne in 1558, English Protestants no longer felt it necessary or politic to direct such warnings to their monarch. But they retained a sympathy for the American victims of Spanish oppression. The riches that Spain drew from slave labor in the New World had helped to make her the greatest power in the Old World, strong enough perhaps to overrun Europe and saddle people there with the same slavery that the Indians were suffering. In addition, Spain’s aggressive Catholicism posed a challenge to all Protestants. Any blow struck against her in the New World could be viewed as a blow for truth as well as freedom.

> The situation invited men to think of a strategy that might bring freedom to the New World and at the same time relieve the Old World of the Spanish threat. Such a strategy did develop. And as has often been the case in the history of freedom, it took its rise almost accidentally out of a shady enterprise for private profit. It began with the activities of John Hawkins of Plymouth, a man of doubtful righteousness but undoubted daring, who had learned of the demand for African slaves in Spanish America. Although the Portuguese forbade English trade in Africa and the Spanish forbade it in the New World, Hawkins in three separate voyages bought, stole, and captured slaves from the coast of Guinea and carried them to the Spanish Main, where he was able to frighten the authorities into letting him sell them. During the last voyage, on which he was accompanied by Francis Drake, the Spanish made a surprise attack on his fleet of six ships, lying at anchor in the port of San Juan de Ulúa in Mexico. After a fiery battle in the harbor, he and Drake were able to make their escape in separate ships, but with the loss of the other ships and of three hundred of the four hundred men. Hawkins regarded the attack as treachery, coming as it did after a solemn agreement, with hostages given on both sides. If English seamen had needed an excuse for piracy against Spain, they now had it. And foremost of those who seized the excuse was Francis Drake. 10

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 197-212). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

> Just how far Drake intended to go with the alliance is impossible to say, for he never said himself. The Spanish authorities in Panama, however, had no doubt. “We hold it certain,” they reported, “that the principal design of these English is to explore and study this land, and what strength there is in it, in order to come from England with more people to plunder and occupy it.” 17 Drake and his lieutenant, John Oxenham, may not have been so ambitious, but they certainly did not mean to leave the Spanish in unmolested possession. In the days while they waited for the passage of the pack train, their Cimarron friends had taken them to a lookout atop a tree on a high ridge that overlooked both the Atlantic and the Pacific. It was Drake’s first sight of the Pacific, and “hee besought Almightie God of his goodnesse to give him life and leave to sayle once in an English Ship in that sea.” Oxenham vowed that “he would follow him by Gods grace.” 18

> The Spanish had already envisaged that the English with the help of the Cimarrons would reach the Pacific and prey on the unprotected ships that carried the treasure from Peru to Panama. 19 But this, as the Spanish saw it, was only the beginning. Nombre de Dios, one official announced “is as good as lost.” 20 And a prisoner taken by the Spanish assured them that the pirates had promised the Cimarrons to sack the city “and deliver to them what Spanish inhabitants, men and women, it may have, to be their slaves.” 2l

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 246-258). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Cimarrons! And how Drake assumed that they would become citizens/subjects like anyone else.

> The Cimarrons need not be the only people to benefit from settlement in the straits colony. Hakluyt thought it might also include “condemned Englise men and women, in whom there may be founde hope of amendement.” 38 Emigration would provide a second chance for these unfortunates. Hakluyt’s scheme, like Drake’s actual alliance with the Cimarrons, shows no sign of racial prejudice, unless in this assignment of English criminals to a place alongside the Cimarrons. That the colonists would enjoy the freedom of Englishmen is suggested in Hakluyt’s admission that they might ultimately become independent. “Admit,” he said, “… that the English there would aspire to governement of themselves, yet were it better that it sholde be soe then that the Spanyard shold with the treasure of that countrey torment all the contries of Europe.” 39 He did not say that the Cimarrons would share in the aspiration for self-government, but neither did he suggest that they would be held in any kind of bondage. And indeed the voluntary immigration he envisaged for them would seem to preclude any such intention.

> England did not pursue Hakluyt’s proposal, but by the time he made it, in 1579 or 1580, colonization was in the air. And Raleigh’s Roanoke colony was only five years off. In that venture Drake and Hakluyt were both to be closely involved. Some of the preconceptions they brought to the enterprise should by now be evident. But the experience gained by Drake and other corsairs in the Caribbean was not the only experience available to guide the Roanoke colonists. While Drake and Oxenham were probing the Spanish empire close to its center, another set of Englishmen farther north in the New World had been serving a somewhat different apprenticeship for colonization.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 350-363). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

The utopia they dreamed of!

> Although Queen Elizabeth granted Gilbert a charter that allowed him to hand out American land to investors, he had to consider the question of how to deal with the current owners or occupiers of it. There was no reason to suppose that the temperate regions of North America were less densely populated than the tropics. And to achieve a military conquest of the natives as he had done in Ireland might require more men and longer supply lines than he could manage without government financing. It would be wiser and safer to follow the Spanish practice of alliance with good Indians against bad. Such was the advice that the elder Hakluyt gave Gilbert. Nothing was more important, he said, than to get on good terms with the Indians of the area where the settlement was made. In this way the English would learn “all their wantes, all their strengthes, all their weaknesse, and with whome they are in warre, and with whome confiderate in peace and amitie.” 47 If the Indians on the coast were hostile, this need not impair the strategy. The first settlement should be at the mouth of a river, preferably on an island, which could be fortified. Then if the neighboring Indians proved to be of the cannibal type, the English could send an expedition up the river or along the coast to make contact with the right kind. 48

> Gilbert confirmed the desirability of this strategy by questioning David Ingram, an Englishman who had survived the battle at San Juan de Ulúa. He had been put ashore near there and, so he claimed at least, had walked through the continent to Nova Scotia, where he picked up a ride home in a fishing boat. According to Ingram, North America was full of Indians at war with one another, and the most feared were the Cannibals, “whose foode is mans flesh, and have teeth like dogges, and doo pursue them with ravenous myndes to eate theyr flesh, and devoure them.” It was not to be doubted that good Indians pursued by Cannibals would welcome the protection of the English and gratefully give up to them “such competent quantity of Lande, as every way shall be correspondent to the Christians expectation, and contentation.” 49

> Nor was it to be doubted that the good Indians would work for the English in producing whatever commodities the country afforded. Drake, confining himself to pillage, had not been obliged to think about getting work out of anybody other than the men who manned his ships, and the compulsion available to a captain aboard ship has always been extraordinary. Hakluyt had not really confronted the question of work in the colony he proposed for the Straits of Magellan. Frobisher had brought along paid English labor, and his colony had not lasted long enough to establish relations with the natives. In planning for labor, therefore, Gilbert had little to go on except the Spanish example, and that he rejected. Gilbert did not count on discovering gold or silver. Though he naturally hoped for treasure, and hoped also to find a northwest passage, he envisaged a settlement in which men would “manure,” that is, cultivate the soil and engage in the production of ordinary commodities, either those that the country afforded naturally or those that human ingenuity could extract from it: furs, fish, dyestuffs, lumber, and who knew what else. Hakluyt had assured him that however barren the land might appear, “every soyle of the world by arte may be made to yeelde things to feede and to cloth men.” 50 In thinking about the labor needed to make the earth yield its fruits, Gilbert and his associates had decided to employ both Englishmen and Indians. In both cases, they reasoned, all the inducement needed was the comfort that well-directed work would purchase.

> Christopher Carleill, an enthusiastic supporter, reported how good-for-nothing English beggars had become new men when given a job to do in the English army in the Netherlands. 51 If such paupers were shipped to North America, they would surely have more to do and a better life than in the army. Similarly the Indians, who now eked out a savage existence without proper clothing or housing, would be transformed by the material comforts of civilization and the spiritual comforts of Christianity. Sir George Peckham, who intended to sponsor a special community within the colony, believed that the Indians “so soone as they shall begin but a little to taste of civillitie, will take mervailous delight in any garment be it never so simple.” 52 And the demand for the trappings of civility would turn them from the indolent manner of living in which they allegedly gathered from the land only what “the ground of itself’ dooth naturally yeelde.” 53 When instructed by the English, they would understand “how the tenth part of their land may be so manured and emploied, as it may yeeld more commodities to the necessary use of mans life, then the whole now dooth.” 54 As a result they would “by little and little forsake their barbarous and savage living, and growe to such order and civilitie with us, as there may be well expected from thence no lesse quantitie and diversitie of merchandize then is now had out of Dutchland, Italie, France or Spaine.” 55

> It was a blueprint for Utopia: English benefactors living side by side with Indian beneficiaries, both enjoying new comforts in peace and prosperity, with the Cannibals expelled to some outer region. Indeed, if we turn to Utopia itself, we find that Sir Thomas More had envisaged nothing better in his ideal state, when he described the Utopian manner of colonization:

> "… they enroll citizens out of every city [in Utopia] and, on the mainland nearest them, wherever the natives have much unoccupied and uncultivated land, they found a colony under their own laws. They join with themselves the natives if they are willing to dwell with them. When such a union takes place, the two parties gradually and easily merge and together absorb the same way of life and the same customs, much to the great advantage of both peoples. By their procedures they make the land sufficient for both, which previously seemed poor and barren to the natives. The inhabitants who refuse to live according to their laws, they drive from the territory which they carve out for themselves. If they resist, they wage war against them. They consider it a most just cause for war when a people which does not use its soil but keeps it idle and waste nevertheless forbids the use and possession of it to others who by the rule of nature ought to be maintained by it." 56

> Gilbert, like the Utopians, was probably prepared to expel uncooperative savages from unworked land that they would not part with. Sir George Peckham ventured his own opinion: “I doo verily think that God did create lande, to the end that it shold by Culture and husbandrie, yeeld things necessary for mans lyfe.” 57 The Indians, then, were expected to give their land willingly and willingly to work under English guidance. But land could rightly be taken, even in Utopia, from those who did not work it.

> Work came first, property rights second. And where did freedom come? What if the Indians refused the enticements of civility and refused to work for what they did not want? The Spanish on Hispaniola had considered and answered the question. In 1517 a team of Jeronymite friars had investigated the treatment of the remaining Indians there and concluded that it was justified because they would not work unless forced to. 58 They must be made to work for Spain, as the Spanish government proclaimed in 1513, “to prevent their living in idleness.” 59 In Hispaniola work took precedence over freedom as well as property. Neither Gilbert nor More reached such a conclusion. More would simply have driven out the lazy natives. Gilbert and his friends probably would have taken the same course, but were never faced with the decision. After a preliminary reconnaissance of Newfoundland and the Gulf of Maine, Gilbert was lost at sea on the way home. His colony never got on the ground.

> The Englishmen who finally settled North America would have to face the problem of unwilling workers, not only with regard to the natives but also with regard to the needy laborers they brought with them. But by 1583, when Gilbert’s ship went down, English plans for the New World did not include slavery or forced labor of any kind. The Cannibals, to be sure, would receive rough treatment; but those who would join with the English, whether the Cimarrons of the south or the good Indians of the north, would enjoy gentle government, civility, Christianity, superior technology, and abundance. This was the point at which English experience and thinking about America had arrived when Walter Raleigh brought to convergence at Roanoke the southern experience of Drake, the northern plans of Gilbert, and the skilled guidance of the Hakluyts. 1 Samuel Davies, Virginia’s Danger and Remedy (Williamsburg,

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 461-476). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

"Good indians vs cannibals"

## 2 THE LOST COLONY

> WALTER Raleigh was Humphrey Gilbert’s half brother. Though Raleigh was the younger by about fifteen years, the two men had been close. Like Gilbert, Raleigh had served an apprenticeship with the queen’s forces in Ireland and had then become interested in America. He had invested in Gilbert’s proposed colony and might have gone along on the exploratory expedition had he not been tied to England by a queen who liked to have her favorites close at hand. Raleigh, for the moment at least, was one of her favorites. She had endowed him with sinecures, monopolies, and pensions that transformed him rapidly from a poor young gentleman into a rich young courtier. Tall and handsome, looking like a costume actor ready for the stage, he had at the same time the vision, the brilliance of mind, and the daring that England nourished in such abundance during those years. When Gilbert vanished at sea, Raleigh had no difficulty in getting the queen to issue him a patent like Gilbert’s, conveying dominion over any part of the American coast where he could establish a colony (and everything six hundred miles north and south of it) within the ensuing six years. 1

> Raleigh may have toyed with the idea of fixing his settlement in the northern area that Gilbert had investigated, but by the time he received his patent, on March 25, 1584, he had his eye on territory farther south, closer to the Spanish. He had already begun to fit out two small ships to reconnoiter the region; and on April 27 they were off, commanded by two young men from the large household he had gathered around him, Philip Amadas and Arthur Barlowe. With them as pilot went Simon Fernandez, a naturalized Portuguese who had sailed with Gilbert. Raleigh himself was not aboard. The queen would let him found a colony, but she was not likely to let him go to it himself.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 571-587). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

> While the colony would thus enable the queen to win the oppressed peoples of the New World, it would also enable her to rescue those Englishmen at home who suffered want and oppression. Like Thomas More, Hakluyt was troubled by the growing number of men and women for whom England could afford neither food nor shelter nor even the opportunity to work for their bread. They drifted from place to place by the hundred, begging and thieving until the gallows claimed them. The prisons of the land were “daily pestered and stuffed full of them.” 19

> Hakluyt was not exaggerating. England’s population, for reasons that still mystify demographers, had begun to rise rapidly in the early sixteenth century and continued to do so until the middle of the seventeenth century, so that the island’s numbers rose from under three million in 1500 to more than five million by the middle of the next century. 20 England’s economy did not expand correspondingly, to furnish work for the new millions. Prices rose steadily, followed at some distance by a rise in rents and a much smaller rise in wages. The price of provisions used by a laborer’s family rose twice as fast as wages. From a quarter to a half of the population lived below the level recognized at the time to constitute poverty. Few of them could count on regular meals at home, and more and more were forced to the road, where, as Hakluyt said, they fell “to pilferinge and thevinge and other lewdnes.” 21 To plant a colony in America, Hakluyt argued, would furnish a twofold remedy to the problem of the unemployed poor. Not only the colonists but their Indian friends would need English goods, especially English cloth. In order to supply them, shuttles would fly in England’s looms and the poor would be able to earn a decent living. Those not employed in supplying the colonies would themselves become colonists and enjoy the manifold opportunities of the New World.

> Hakluyt was a compassionate man. He wanted to save those who “for trifles may otherwise be devoured by the gallowes.” 22 The idleness, poverty, and corruption of the English poor did not seem to him to be the result of any unworthiness of character. Desperation, not depravity, drove them to crime. The problem was that England had more people than jobs. The cure was to find more jobs, whether in England or in America. Hakluyt’s feeling for the English poor was of a piece with his feeling for the oppressed Indians and blacks in America. Both were good people, suffering through no fault of their own. As England was “swarminge at this day with valiant youthes rusting and hurtfull by lacke of employement,” 23 so New Spain was filled with “valiant” people like the Cimarrons and the Chichimici, suffering by Spanish oppression. The two must be brought together, under England’s benevolent rule, in a new English empire on American soil.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 661-683). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

> Probably a large percentage of the soldiers and settlers as well as the seamen had been impressed for the voyage. Impressment was England’s way of recruiting for military expeditions across the Channel or overseas. The casualty rate on such expeditions was notorious, and the communities that furnished men for them deliberately selected their most undesirable inhabitants. 29 Those who returned were likely to be found among the beggars who wandered England’s roads. Hakluyt had, in fact, included these veterans among the persons whom England might send to the colony. If any of the Roanoke colonists were obtained in this way, they fulfilled Hakluyt’s plan for snatching men from the gallows, but they were scarcely the most promising material for starting a new biracial community in combination with the “kind and loving people” of Roanoke. The thought apparently occurred to someone else who was in on planning the colony. An anonymous document spells out the need for strict discipline and includes a brief set of proposed regulations with specific injunctions against any soldier striking an Indian or entering an Indian’s house without leave. The same document also contains the provision, in keeping with the colony’s purpose, “That no Indian be forced to labor unwillyngly.” 30

> The author of this document, like the Hakluyts, advised Raleigh to bring his own labor, at least skilled labor, to assure that the community would be economically viable and productive from the start. But it is not clear that Raleigh succeeded in securing skilled artisans. He would almost certainly not have been able to impress them, and the men he did send certainly showed no great capacity for work. Raleigh did, however, persuade John White, a painter, to go along and make a visual record of the new land; and Thomas Hariot, a mathematician of no small competence, accompanied the expedition to make scientific observations that might reveal the country’s natural resources. Hariot had spent the winter with Manteo and Wanchese, the two Indians brought back by Barlowe. He had taught them English and they had taught him their language and filled him with anticipation of the good things he would find. They returned with the expedition, so that there were at least three members who could serve as interpreters.

> Grenville got the expedition off in April, 1585, proceeding by way of the West Indies. At Puerto Rico he landed, built a fort, and cut trees for the construction of a pinnace (to replace one lost in a storm). There and at Hispaniola he also gathered livestock and tropical plants, including bananas and sugar cane, so that the colonists could try growing these profitable Spanish commodities in Virginia. In the last two weeks of June the vessels straggled into various inlets of the Carolina Banks. Simon Fernandez, piloting the Tyger, ran her aground crossing the bar. For two hours she lay there, and by the time they got her off, many of the provisions intended to sustain the colony during its first year were awash in the hold and ruined. Grenville established headquarters on Roanoke Island, from which he explored the mainland below the island, while another party examined the country bordering Albemarle Sound. But Grenville apparently did not intend to stay permanently with the colony. He, and presumably Cavendish too, departed at the end of August, leaving Lane in command. 31

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 707-731). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

The colonists were lazy and slow. They really didn't want to work. They were stuck in tradition. These first waves of gentlemen + poor people just died. They needed the middle class.

>At Roanoke itself things went smoothly for a time. Wingina, recovered from his wounds, welcomed the visitors, and the Indians gave freely of their supplies to the English, who had lost most of their own when the Tyger grounded. By the time the colonists were settled, it was too late to plant corn, and they seem to have been helpless when it came to living off the land. They did not know the herbs and roots and berries of the country. They could not or would not catch fish in any quantity, because they did not know how to make weirs. And when the Indians showed them, they were slow learners: they were unable even to repair those that the Indians made for them. Nor did they show any disposition for agriculture. Hariot admired the yields that the Indians got in growing maize; but the English, for lack of seed, lack of skill, or lack of will, grew nothing for themselves, even when the new planting season came round again. Superior English technology appeared, for the moment at least, to be no technology at all, as far as food production was concerned.

> The English refusal or inability to help themselves live from the land is a little surprising in the light of the sponsors’ interest in making their colony yield marketable commodities. In England there had been talk of getting ten times as much from the land as the Indians did. Grenville had taken pains to collect plants from the West Indies to try out at Roanoke; and Hariot occupied himself almost entirely in ascertaining what grew and what might be made to grow. The difficulty may have lain in the military character of the settlers. Soldiers expected to go hungry often, but they did not expect to grow their own food. It was up to their commanders to see that they were fed; and on overseas expeditions commanders usually bought or seized supplies from the people of the country. Lane may, in fact, have considered it more practicable to get food from the Indians than to turn his troops into farmers. He evidently had his hands full maintaining discipline without putting the men to unexpected tasks. He had, he complained to his friend Sir Philip Sidney, “emungst savages, the chardege of wylde menn of myne owene nacione, Whose unrulynes ys suche as not to gyve leasure to the goovernour to bee all most at any tyme from them.” 51

> Unfortunately, the Indians, though hospitable, were not prepared for company that came to stay. They had no great stores to draw upon when faced with the English demands for corn. Whatever the English may have offered in exchange, the extra labor of feeding so many extra mouths must have imposed a severe strain on them, for sustained work was not a normal part of Indian life. The Roanokes, like most other North American Indians, grew corn (maize) in quantities barely adequate to their survival from harvest to harvest, relying on roots and berries and on hunting and fishing to get them through when the corn ran out. They had no extra fields or seed prepared for guests. If the English continued to demand food from them, the Indians, in order to supply it, would have to clear more land, plant more corn, and beg, borrow, or steal seed from other Indians.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 817-839). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Maybe the Indians actually were really great!

> The various reports of Drake’s activities in the Caribbean suggest that liberating victims of Spanish oppression was part of the plan. With Drake’s help, it seems, the vision of Hakluyt and Raleigh was beginning to materialize: England was bringing freedom to the New World. To be sure, it was coming as a means to an end; Drake and Raleigh were both interested in power, profit, and plunder. But freedom has frequently had to make its way in the world by serving as a means to an end, and it has often proved a powerful means. At Roanoke we look for it now to show its power. But by the time Drake arrived there in triumph, in June, 1586, something had gone awry.

> The colony had begun auspiciously, with the leaders as confident as Barlowe had been. On August 12 Lane had written to Sir Francis Walsingham that even the barrenest regions yielded “sumwhat that ether for knowen Vertue ys of pryce in Chrystendom, or sumwhat at leeste to the smelle pleasing.” They had not, he said, found “one stynckinge weede growynge in thys lande.” 41 Three weeks later he wrote to the elder Hakluyt in even more extravagant terms: Virginia not only smelled good, it was “the goodliest and most pleasing territorie of the world,” and once inhabited by Englishmen it would yield every commodity of Spain, France, Italy, and the East. It was already “very wel peopled and towned, though savagelie,” but these savages were “naturally most curteous, and very desirous to have clothes.” 42

> Lane was perhaps telling Hakluyt what he knew Hakluyt wanted to hear and what he himself wanted to believe. But Thomas Hariot, who spent the ensuing months in a careful investigation of Virginia’s native commodities, was also optimistic about the future productivity of the country. By 1587, when Hariot wrote his sober and detailed appraisal of Virginia, 43 he knew that the Indians were not as numerous or as courteous or as fond of clothes as Lane supposed in 1585. But he still thought that “in respect of troubling our inhabiting and planting, [they] are not to be feared, but that they shall have cause both to feare and love us, that shall inhabite with them.” 44 A few years later, he wrote of them, “to confesse a truthe I cannot remember, that ever I saw better or quietter people than they.” 45

> Hariot wrote sympathetically of the Indians. He probably knew them better than the other settlers did, because of his months of teaching and being taught by Manteo and Wanchese. John White, the artist of the expedition, also knew them and recorded his respect for them in the way he painted them. White enjoys a distinction among artists of his time because of the spontaneous naturalism of his drawings, a quality not to be found in other English painters for another half century. John White’s Indians are his own, not Peter Martyr’s paragons, and yet there is a dignity in them that conforms to what civil men have liked to call the myth of the noble savage. 46 That myth has been expressed as often by men who knew the Indian at first hand as by those who idealized him from the distance. It has survived massacre, murder, and war, perhaps because the Indian himself believed it. Although he probably did not share the European’s dream of a primitive but perfect golden age, the Indian’s view of himself evidently included an element of pride that gave him, especially in relations with other men, an extraordinary dignity. It is impossible to read the first-hand accounts of Indians, from widely separated regions and of widely divergent cultures, without being impressed by this quality, as Arthur Barlowe and John White and Thomas Hariot were impressed by it at Roanoke. Unfortunately, there as in Hispaniola, it led the white man to expect more of the Indian than the Indian expected of himself.

> At the same time, both Indians and Englishmen expected more of Englishmen than Englishmen were able to fulfill. The myth of the noble savage was matched by the equally tenacious myth of the godlike white man. Hariot, after describing the Indians’ admiration for English weapons, books, clocks, and deadly diseases (which seemed like magic weapons the English could direct at will), explained that “some people could not tel whether to thinke us gods or men, and the rather because that all the space of their sicknesse, there was no man of ours knowne to die.” 47 The fact that there were no women in the expedition and that the men showed no interest in Indian women (if we may believe Hariot) led some Indians to the opinion “that wee were not borne of women, and therefore not mortall, but that wee were men of an old generation many yeeres past then risen againe to immortalitie.” 48

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 766-779). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

> What went wrong at Roanoke was that the Indians did not show the nobility or the English the divinity that was expected of them. The trouble began even before Grenville departed. In July, during his exploration of the mainland, at the Indian village of Aquascogoc on a branch of the Pamlico River, an Indian allegedly stole a silver cup. Three days later, as the party was returning down the Pamlico, Grenville sent Philip Amadas to recover it. When he failed to get it, the record says, “we burnt, and spoyled their corne, and Towne, all the people beeing fledde.” 50 If the theft was ignoble, the English reaction was scarcely godlike.

> At Roanoke itself things went smoothly for a time. Wingina, recovered from his wounds, welcomed the visitors, and the Indians gave freely of their supplies to the English, who had lost most of their own when the Tyger grounded. By the time the colonists were settled, it was too late to plant corn, and they seem to have been helpless when it came to living off the land. They did not know the herbs and roots and berries of the country. They could not or would not catch fish in any quantity, because they did not know how to make weirs. And when the Indians showed them, they were slow learners: they were unable even to repair those that the Indians made for them. Nor did they show any disposition for agriculture. Hariot admired the yields that the Indians got in growing maize; but the English, for lack of seed, lack of skill, or lack of will, grew nothing for themselves, even when the new planting season came round again. Superior English technology appeared, for the moment at least, to be no technology at all, as far as food production was concerned.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 812-824). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

> What, then, of the liberated slaves and Indians? The saddest part of the story and perhaps the most revealing is that no one bothered to say. None of the accounts either of Drake’s voyage or of the Roanoke colony mentions what became of them. Thus casually and ignominiously ended the first attempt to join the planting of English gentle government in North America with the liberation of the Caribbean and South America from Spanish tyranny.

> Raleigh himself did not give up and later tried again in Guiana. But at Roanoke what followed was anticlimax. Grenville returned there with seven or eight ships and three or four hundred men a few weeks after Lane’s departure. Finding the place deserted, he left only fifteen or eighteen men to hold the fort and hurried on to the South Atlantic in quest of Spanish prizes. The following July, when John White arrived with 110 settlers, Grenville’s small force was not to be found. White’s party included his daughter and her husband and again Manteo. They had intended to settle on the Chesapeake but never got that far, apparently because their pilot (Simon Fernandez again) was too eager to get at the business of privateering and refused to take them. Instead, they settled again at Roanoke, where they baptized Manteo and declared him, as vassal of Raleigh, the lord of the island, a ceremony designed to carry out the original strategy of allying with the local Indians. Having killed the king of the Roanokes, the English were installing a puppet of their own. Manteo, however, was probably the only Indian prepared to recognize the authority with which the English invested him. He could not, at any rate, command from his countrymen the supplies of corn that the colony still needed for survival. In order to speed the flow of provisions from England, White decided to go back with the returning ships. He sailed in late August, 1587, leaving behind his daughter and her newborn child. 56 Because of the Spanish Armada and other difficulties, he did not get back to Roanoke until 1590, and he found the Island again deserted. 57

> John White’s colony was lost and what became of the settlers will probably never be known. 58 But something more had been lost before White’s settlers even landed. At Roanoke in the winter of 1585– 86, English plans and hopes for America had come up against their first serious encounter with the continent and its people. In that encounter neither Englishmen nor native Americans lived up to expectations. Doubtless the expectations had been too high, but it is always a little sad to watch men lower their sights. And Roanoke was only the beginning.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 871-890). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

## 3 IDLE INDIAN AND LAZY ENGLISHMAN

> ROANOKE dispelled some illusions, both among the Indians and among the English. The Indians of the Virginia region would not be likely again to mistake the English for gods. The English, on the other hand, would be wary of expecting to find America divided into good Indians and cannibals, with the good Indians eagerly awaiting English help. From this point we can perhaps date the beginnings of the English disposition to regard all Indians as alike. As yet, however, it did not follow that the only good Indian was a dead one. When the first permanent English settlers arrived in America in 1607, their sponsors had not given up hope of an integrated biracial community, in which indigent Englishmen would work side by side with willing natives, under gentle English government.

> The sponsors were closely linked to the Roanoke venture. The Virginia Company of London came into existence in 1606, created by a charter from the king to Richard Hakluyt and “divers others,” including one of London’s leading merchants, Sir Thomas Smith. 1 Smith, the son of one of Raleigh’s backers, became the treasurer of the new company, its principal officer and its moving force. It was a joint-stock company, and its members hoped for a profit, just as Raleigh’s backers had. But they were barred, ostensibly at least, from the one source of wealth that had paid off for Raleigh: his only returns had come from the Spanish prizes that Grenville and Fernandez took on their voyages to and from the colony. England’s new king, James I, had made peace with Spain, and he did not countenance freebooting expeditions against England’s old enemy. It seems clear that some of the investors in the Virginia Company expected to use an American colony as a base from which to continue their depredations, far from the king’s watchful eye. But the company could not officially engage in such exploits or even condone them, nor could it serve as a cover for schemes to subvert the Spanish empire. 2

> Probably the majority of investors looked toward legitimate profits. They invested their money in hopes of finding precious metals or minerals, of discovering valuable plants for dyestuffs and medicines, and perhaps of opening a northwest passage to the Pacific. But they were prepared to settle for less spectacular goods like glass, iron, furs, potash, pitch, and tar, things that England needed and mostly had to import from other countries. After the Roanoke experience they must have known that it might take time to develop a trade in any product. Of all the natural treasures mentioned in Barlowe’s and Hariot’s glowing accounts of Virginia, only sassafras (thought to be a cure for syphilis) had yet a ready market in the Old World. Though the promoters of the company still hoped for instant success, they had to stress the country’s future promise, the great multitude of good things it was going to yield.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 962-986). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Settlers thought in relation to the Indians they would be like the Romans in Britain.

> In spite of its distrust, the Virginia Company was eager to affirm its good will. Its aim for the Indians, as explained a little later, was only to bring them the gospel, and “to cover their naked miserie, with civill use of foode, and cloathing, and to traine them by gentle meanes, to those manuall artes and skill, which they so much affect, and doe admire to see in us.” In return for these blessings, the English would require nothing of them “but a quiet residence to us and ours, that by our owne labour and toyle, we may worke this good unto them and recompence our owne adventures, costs and travells.” They were still expected to become a part of the English community, where they would be “most friendly welcome to conjoyne their labours with ours, and shall enjoy equall priviledges with us.” Virginia Indians would experience none of the “stormes of raging cruelties” perpetrated by the Spanish in the West Indies, but only “faire and loving meanes suting to our English Natures.” 8 The Virginia Company thought of the enterprise as something like the conversion of the primitive Britons by the Romans. Without the civilizing influence of the Romans, England itself would still be populated by heathen savages just as America still was. 9 The members who stayed in London clung to this vision for most of the company’s life. Their company, they believed, was not like other joint-stock companies, “the ends for which it is established beinge not simply matter of Trade, butt of a higher Nature.” 10 Although they hoped for profits, theirs was a patriotic enterprise that would bring civility and Christianity to the savages of North America and redemption from idleness and crime to the unemployed masses of England.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1011-1024). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

This long section is a great resource about Indian economy.

> Robert Beverley, writing at the end of the century, tells us that the Virginia Indians “had nothing which they reckoned Riches, before the English went among them, except Peak, Roenoke, and such like trifles made out of the Cunk shell.” 21

> Indians did not vie with one another in conspicuous consumption. And indeed there would seem to be little likelihood of anyone storing up treasures among a people who valued leisure above worldly goods. The Indian way of life was of the kind that still generates, among those who practice it, a minimum of worldly goods and a maximum of leisure time. 22 Indians did not, for example, devote much attention to housing. Powhatan, to be sure, was enchanted by the relative sturdiness of the flimsy houses that the English threw up and persuaded them to build him one. 23 But other Indians showed no interest in anything so solid. Although they lived during most of the year in permanent towns or villages, their houses were simple affairs, constructed by inserting saplings in the ground and bending the tops together to make a frame like an arbor. Large frames were rectangular or oval in ground plan, small ones circular. On the frame they placed bark, hides, or mats to keep out the weather, leaving a hole at the top to release smoke and one next to the ground for an entrance. Large or small, the houses were all of a piece and offered little opportunity for display of status: “who knoweth one of them knoweth them all, even the Chief kings house yt self.” And the furniture was as simple as the house. The ground served for a floor. There were no chairs or tables, and platforms raised from the ground on forked sticks served as beds. House and furniture alike could be put together without heavy labor. Building them was women’s work. 24

> Men provided clothing in the form of skins taken in the hunt. But Indians, like well-to-do Englishmen, apparently regarded hunting as sport. Hunting grounds might be some distance from the village; and when hunting season came round, the whole tribe picked up and moved, the women preceding the men in order to build temporary housing. The hunt itself was a cooperative venture among the men, in which they set fire to an area, enclosing a group of deer or driving them into the water, where they could be killed from canoes. 25 The men were also in charge of fishing, which they did with weirs and nets, as well as with spears and hooks. 26 But the Virginia Indians did not rely on hunting or fishing for most of their food. They relied principally on the nuts and fruits they gathered and on the corn, beans, and squashes or melons that they grew. Tending the crops was also women’s work

> Indeed, nearly any activity that could be designated as work at all was left to the women. They were the principal means of production in Indian Virginia, Having acquired a wife (for whom he may have had to pay a bride price), a man counted on her to support him. 27 He could make canoes, weapons, and weirs without losing his dignity, but the only other labor he ordinarily engaged in was clearing fields for planting, and the method employed made this less than arduous. Clearing consisted merely of girdling the trees and burning brush around them to hasten their death. The next year the women worked the ground between the trees, using a crooked stick as a hoe and planting corn, beans, squash, and melons all together in little hills. 28

> Although we do not know how long the Indians used a field before allowing it to return to forest, it seems likely that they did not have to move whenever they depleted the soil they were cultivating. The English had the impression that their villages were permanently located. Given the probable acreage under cultivation, it would have been possible to use a field for several years and then to leave it fallow for thirty or forty and still not have to move the village to find fresh land. 29 It required less than an acre to grow in Indian fashion enough food to feed a person in Indian fashion for a year. Indian corn gave a yield several times greater than English wheat; and according to modern authorities “one acre in mixed planting of maize, beans, and squash, perhaps with sunflower or Chenopodium added, would indeed sustain a person for a year.” 30 John Smith found the fields adjoining the villages to vary from 20 to 200 acres, which was probably roughly the size of their populations. 31 At that rate, most villages could stay in one place on a tract of, say, 500 or 600 acres with a cycle of using a field for five or ten years and then leaving it for thirty or forty. Thus the labor of building permanent new houses would come only seldom, as the old ones fell down.

> This form of agriculture is common among pre-industrial populations all over the world and has generally been regarded as wasteful and primitive. Recent investigators have shown, however, that it can produce more food per man-hour (or woman-hour) of labor than any other form. Growing a mixture of crops in the same field tends to prolong its fertility, and the long fallow period, allowing trees and shrubs to spring up, restores the fertility of the soil by bringing up nutrients from well below the root level of crop plants and spreading them on the surface in the form of litter. 32 The system requires no manure and no animals to furnish manure. It requires no plows and no draft animals to feed and care for. It requires virtually no work on the land other than clearing, planting, and harvesting. Even weeding is minimized, because few weed seeds are present in the newly cleared land. Only when an increasing population demands a larger total product and furnishes a larger labor force to grow it do peoples turn to more intensive but more labor-consuming forms of agriculture. 33

> The Indians had more than enough land for their shifting agriculture: and in the course of the centuries they had lived in Virginia, they had shaped the land to their purposes, so that it also yielded foods other than those which they planted. In particular they had achieved great tracts of meadow. Their fires for turning woodland into cornfield must often have escaped; and the same was true of their fires for hunting, which were apparently set in grassy areas. The periodic large-scale incineration of young shrubs and trees tended in the long run to produce and preserve grasslands. As a result, there was probably more open land in Indian Virginia than there is in Virginia today. 34 At the same time there were great and unusual forests. When the English arrived, they described the country as almost entirely wooded, and so did travelers who came there for the next two hundred years. 35 But the woods, as the English found them in 1607, consisted mainly of trees too large or thick-barked to be affected by fire, and they were generally free of undergrowth. The repeated burnings prevented the forest from renewing itself, so that the large trees became widely spaced, with room for light to penetrate between them. The English noted that you could see for more than a mile through the woods, that you could ride a horse through them at a gallop, or that you could drive a coach through them. 36

> The effect was not only to give the landscape a more open appearance than it has today, but to make room for a much greater variety of plants and animals. The grasslands supported not only deer but also elk and buffalo, which had made their way from pasturelands similarly cleared by Indian burnings beyond the mountains. And the open glades supported fruit and nut trees that cannot be found in the dense second-growth pine forests that have replaced the Indian landscape. Hickory and black walnut were both plentiful and highly valued. Mulberries, plums, and persimmons abounded, as did wild grapes and wild strawberries. 37 None of these would have grown or produced fruit in deep woods. The Indians, though without domestic animals, had by their burnings turned the country into a veritable park, abounding in game and in natural fruits, berries, and nuts, not to mention flowers. One Englishman walking out for four miles from Jamestown found his promenade the whole way “all flowing over with fair flowers of sundry colors and kinds, as though it had been in any garden or orchard in England.” 38 During a large part of the year, especially during the early summer, before their corn ripened, the Indians relied heavily on this natural orchard. Since early summer was the time when Arthur Barlowe made his reconnaissance of Roanoke, he was perhaps not wholly fanciful in insisting that the earth brought forth all things in abundance without toil or labor.

> Barlowe may not have realized that the abundance was not entirely natural. It did require the clearing and burning that the Indians had been carrying on for centuries. But even if Barlowe had spent longer in Virginia, he might still have been impressed by the absence of toil. In order to stay alive the Indian needed to do very little work. His women needed to do more. Smith noted how the male scorned doing anything that could be considered women’s work, with the result “that the women be verie painefull [industrious] and the men often idle.” 39 But even the women may have had less to do than we might expect. Studies of modern hunting and food-gathering societies and of societies practicing long-fallow agriculture show that the amount of time spent in productive work is considerably below what is required of most people in industrial societies, averaging from two to six hours a day. 40 Thomas Hariot at Roanoke estimated that the work of growing corn required no more than about twenty-four hours a year, all told, for enough to feed one person. 41 There were surely plenty of other jobs for the women to do: making baskets and pots, fashioning furs and skins into clothing, pounding corn into meal, cooking, making houses, tending children. But they may have had more leisure than women in European peasant societies and a good deal more than most women in early industrial societies. No landlord or employer collected a toll from their labor. The tribute their tribe owed to Powhatan was the only drain on their efforts. They may therefore have had a good many idle hours too.

> While the Indians had worked out a way of life that required a minimum of labor, especially for men, they did interrupt their leisure with lengthy ceremonies that we can now view only dimly through the eyes of their unsympathetic English observers. According to the English, Indian religion was focused on an evil deity, whom the English identified at once as the devil. This devil the people were obliged to propitiate in a variety of ceremonies, conducted by priests who served as his emissaries. The most formidable ceremony, seen in the context of other primitive cultures, appears to have been a puberty rite, in which young men were beaten and then taken to live in isolation for several months. To the English, insofar as they were allowed to observe it, this looked like human sacrifice. It is not clear that they actually saw a sacrifice performed, but they were persuaded that it took place, perhaps because they assumed that the devil would demand it. Whatever the ceremony, it seems to have occupied an important place in Indian life, as apparently did the deity who presided over it. 42

> The English were persuaded that the Indian deity was also, at least in some instances, behind another activity that interrupted and perhaps relieved the Indians’ habitual idleness, namely war. It is not known how extensive or frequent warfare may have been before the English came or whether the Indian god actually demanded it from time to time, as civilized deities so often did. 43 The English assumed that the devil and his priests would incite people to war especially against those who were bringing the gospel. But the Indians had certainly made war among themselves before the English arrived. Powhatan apparently obtained his hegemony over the Virginia region by force of arms; and Amadas and Barlowe noted that the Indians in the Roanoke region had been wasted by warfare. 44

> What the actual purpose of Indian warfare may have been must remain speculative. Smith reported that “They seldome make warre for lands or goods, but for women and children, and principally for revenge.” 45 It does seem unlikely that booty or plunder was a common war aim; but land may have been more involved than Smith realized. Any increase in a tribe’s population (natural or acquired) might have necessitated an increase in land, for the Indian economy required large amounts of it. Although a given tribe might have only a small acreage under cultivation at a given time, a substantial acreage had to be left in long-term fallow to renew its fertility. And much more was needed for hunting and fishing and for the gathering of nuts and fruits. What looked like unused empty forest to the English did not necessarily look that way to the Indians. Each tribe had recognized boundaries within which it carried on its activities, and any expansion of hunting or gathering activities by one tribe might bring it into conflict with another.

> Warfare played a large role in Indian men’s sense of masculinity. Although Indian warriors seem to have felt it no shame to retreat in the face of superior force, they took inordinate pride in suffering torture and death without flinching if captured. And they took pleasure in inflicting pain and death on their own captives. On the other hand, they did not undertake war with the systematic rigor and discipline or even the lasting hostility that Europeans brought to it. They did not put to death the women, children, or chieftains whom they captured, but probably adopted them into the tribe, as the Iroquois did. War seems to have been in some measure ritualized, an occasion for the display of masculine virtues. Indians did not have the patience or even the desire to conduct a siege or a prolonged campaign. When they had shown how horrendous they could be in chopping a few people to bits, they were ready to call it a day and return to the easy life. 46

> Such were the people who awaited the English in Virginia. To the first settlers, aboard the Susan Constant, the Godspeed, and the Discovery, they must have looked as outlandish and strange as Englishmen expected non-Englishmen to be. They wore skins instead of clothes; they lived in oddly made flimsy shacks; they were armed only with hatchets and bows; they had no ships; they were covered with paint. The differences between the English and the Indian were not small, but it would be easy to exaggerate them and to overlook some similarities in their ways of life that boded no good for the colony’s future.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1147-1178). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

This Court-as-"continuous fancy dress ball" observation is great.

> England, like Virginia, was ruled by a monarch who had subdued the lesser potentates of the country to his dominion. In the fabric of English life these potentates, the nobility, occupied a far stronger place than the subsidiary werowances did under Powhatan in Virginia. And the character of English government depended heavily on the curbs they placed on the king. Part of their strength lay in their private armies of “retainers,” and they often demonstrated their contempt for the king’s peace by brawling with one another in what might today be called gang wars.

> The king was kept uneasy by the magnitude of their powers, which he sought steadily to reduce. In order to tame them he tried to keep them as close to him as possible at his court, where he could keep an eye on them and where they could vie with one another in the richness of their clothing rather than the fierceness of their arms. Englishmen, being civil, were more fond of clothing than Indians were, and the king was able to keep many of his nobles engaged in a kind of continuous fancy dress ball at court. 47 The king was not, however, strong enough to get along without them. The nobility and their retainers were, in fact, his army or the nucleus from which he built one when it was needed. And he often needed it, in order to sustain the independence of his island in a world dominated by the larger powers of the European continent. Even in peacetime he needed their help, for England, though not a large country, was too big for him to manage by himself. To rule it he relied heavily on his Parliament, an assemblage of the nobles, to which had been added a group of representatives elected by the landholders of the country. Parliament not only assisted the king by making laws, but also levied taxes for him and enabled him to collect them.

> Although in England, as in Indian Virginia, custom was the principal law, with its highest embodiment in the set of judicial precedents known as common law, the king in Parliament could override custom and enact laws for the whole country. For the king to do so by himself, however, as Powhatan apparently could do in Virginia, would have been dangerous. One of the prices he had to pay for Parliament’s help in running England was to forgo any attempt to make laws or levy taxes by himself. Two kings during the seventeenth century did make the attempt; but neither got away with it: one lost only his throne, the other his head. Most kings recognized the limits of their power; they could not act upon their subjects or even tax them (except for some customary duties) without the consent of Parliament. This was the source of English liberty, of English “gentle government.” And Englishmen were proud of it.

> Not many Englishmen had a hand in that government. The nobility, who sat in Parliament by virtue of their birth, amounted to only a tiny fraction of the population. There were 55 of them in 1603. By 1628 the number had increased to 126, but they were never significant by their numbers. 48 A somewhat larger group of dignitaries, the gentry, also had a hand in government. Less exalted and less powerful than the nobles, they were distinguished by a variety of titles and commanded the respect of their neighbors by their wealth, especially wealth in land. They amounted to perhaps 5 percent of the adult male population. Along with the other landowners of the country, amounting to perhaps another 10 percent, they elected representatives to Parliament, the members of the House of Commons, which belied its name by the rank of those who sat in it. English gentle government was government by gentlemen. 49

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1179-1205). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Work!!

> Most Englishmen worked for other Englishmen. It was a major concern not only of their employers but also of the government to keep them working.

> To judge from what churchmen had to say about the matter, the harder all men worked and the harder they had to work the better. Idleness, a masculine virtue among the Indians, had always been a vice in Christian teaching. The Reformers who denounced Catholicism had been particularly emphatic on this point and had condemned as idle the lives of prayer and contemplation sanctioned by the Roman church in its monasteries and convents. God called men to work by the sweat of their brows, the Reformers believed, and a man who worked hard at the job to which God called him, however humble, was honorable in the sight of God. His disposition for hard work might even be a sign that God had singled him out for the saint’s everlasting rest in heaven (where work was apparently no longer required). 51

> Preachers intoned these ideas from English pulpits; and though the church courts did not ordinarily attempt to excommunicate men for not working hard enough, the members of Parliament prescribed hours of work by law that would seemingly have left little opportunity for idleness. The Statute of Artificers of 1563 (reenacting similar provisions from the Statute of Laborers of 1495) required all laborers to work from five in the morning to seven or eight at night from mid-March to mid-September, and during the remaining months of the year from daybreak to night. Time out for eating, drinking, and rest was not to exceed two and a half hours a day. 52

> As with all legislation, we may ask whether the provisions of this act were a description of prevailing practices or an attempt to change them. The Statute of Laborers answers the question by telling us in the preamble that laborers “waste much part of the day … in late coming unto their work, early departing therefrom, long sitting at their breakfast, at their dinner and noon-meat, and long time of sleeping after noon.” 53 Whether this statute or that of 1563 (still in effect when Virginia was founded) altered the situation is not easy to determine. The records of the county courts show varying efforts to enforce other provisions of the statute of 1563, but they are almost wholly silent about this one. That their silence was a product of general compliance with the act seems unlikely for a number of reasons, reasons that may shed some light on the behavior of the first Englishmen in Virginia.

> One part of the adult male population of England was not even expected to comply: gentlemen, including those who passed the act in Parliament, were not affected, except as employers, by the injunctions contained in it. The attitude of gentlemen toward work betrayed the same inconsistency that is suggested in the preachers’ praise of work as a virtue while excluding it from among the joys to be found in paradise. As far as work was concerned, gentlemen had already reached paradise. They expected those who had not yet arrived to work, but to do so themselves would have been to stop being gentlemen. A gentleman, by contemporary standards, was one who could “live idly and without manuall labour, and will beare the port, charge and countenance of a gentleman.” 54 The port, charge, and countenance of a gentleman meant not merely fancy clothing and spacious housing but an entourage of servants who added to the dignity of their employer’s idleness by being as conspicuously idle as possible themselves. According to the leading authority on the English aristocracy of the period, not only were the rich and wellborn “idle almost by definition” but they kept “a huge labour force … in slothful and parasitic personal service.” 55 When the members of Parliament enjoined work without respite, it was a case of “Do as I say, not as I do.”

> Even for anyone inclined to obey the precept rather than the example, it was not possible to keep at work without work to do. In what are today called modern or developed countries unemployment is scarcely unknown. In underdeveloped countries both unemployment and underemployment are persistent facts of life. And England in the seventeenth century, like Virginia, was an underdeveloped country. 56 Its people, that is, produced far less in the way of material goods than they were capable of producing if they had been organized and motivated for the purpose. The great majority of them, as in all underdeveloped countries, were still engaged in agriculture; and agriculture, in spite of the myths of dawn-to-dusk toil that surround it, could not employ men the year round, continuously, or usefully, at the hours prescribed in the Statute of Artificers.

> In large parts of the south and east of England farmers engaged in a much more intensive kind of agriculture than the Indians of Virginia. 57 They plowed and planted their land every year with wheat, rye, barley, and a variety of other crops, allowing only occasional fallow periods and maintaining fertility by the dung from their cattle and sheep. They worked hard and expected their servants to work hard whenever there was work to do, especially when planting time or harvest time came round. But even with milking cows, hedging, ditching, thatching, and a hundred other tasks, there were times when the most industrious farmer could find no good way to keep himself and the men he might employ continuously busy. Bad weather could halt most farm work. You could not plow frozen ground and should not plow if it was soggy. John Law, writing in 1705 and hypothesizing a model economy that might be established on a newly discovered island, took it for granted that the persons engaged in agriculture would be idle, for one reason or another, half the time. 58 Such may have been the case in the parts of England where farmers grew grain and practiced the most intensive husbandry.

> In the greater part of England and Wales, in most of the north and west and in the hilly parts of the south and east, where lands were only marginally fertile, men lived from a way of farming that occupied a good deal less than half their time. In the midst of moors and pastures and woodland they tended little gardens of an acre or two and supplemented their diets, as the Indians did, by gathering roots and nuts and berries from the wilds. In some places they shifted their gardens from time to time, like the Indians, allowing the land to return to forest or waste for a long fallow period. They did not grow enough grain even for their own bread. Their only advantage over the Indians in food production came from the domestic animals (cattle, swine, and sheep) which they kept. Turned into the woods or pastures to forage for themselves in the warmer months, the animals required only a little more care than it took to hunt deer in Virginia (hunting in England was reserved to the gentry). This was a way of life that resembled the Indians’ way more than it resembled the one prescribed in the Statute of Artificers. It offered only a hand-to-mouth existence. It meant frequent hunger and regular malnutrition. But it did not require much work. 59

> People who lived in this manner, though they may have constituted half the population or more, were not in good repute with their countrymen. Grain-growing farmers in the “champion” country of the south and east thought that the woodland and pasture people were no farmers at all. Precisely because their way of life required so little work, it seemed not a proper way for a farmer or a Christian or a good subject of the king. The government worried too about the unruliness of people who had too much time on their hands and too little meat in their bellies. The devil finds work for idle hands, and some of his work might threaten the state as well as the church. It was observed that “the people bred amongst woods are naturally more stubborn and uncivil than in the champion countries.” They were said to “live lawless, nobody to govern them, they care for nobody, having no dependence on anybody.” 60

The poor. This is what it was all about: what to do with the poor? The solution in America would be: give them land and slaves and make them "free." But not for a while.

> The problem was magnified by the explosion of England’s population. As we have seen, the numbers were growing faster than the country could find jobs for them. 61 Hungry and boisterous, they swarmed the roads, looking for enough work to buy them bread but ready to steal if they could not find it. They wound up not only in jail and on the gallows but in the woodlands, eking out a living like other woodland and pasture people. In its efforts to cope with the situation the government was torn between the wish to make people work as hard as possible and the need to supply jobs for them to work at. The latter seemed the more urgent. The government could not contemplate without alarm the rising numbers of hungry, masterless men. They must be found jobs and masters to keep them under control.

> The gentlemen in Parliament, considering the situation, adopted a policy that may be called the conservation of employment. They seem to have assumed that their society could pay for only a fixed amount of work. Work must therefore be rationed, so that everyone could have a little, and those with family responsibilities could have a little more. 62 So that youngsters should not take work away from their elders, the Statute of Artificers made it illegal for a man to practice a trade until he had become a master through seven years of apprenticeship. Even then, until he was thirty years old or married, he was supposed to serve some other master of the trade. And the courts did enforce these provisions. In a typical example, John Pike-man of Barking, Essex, a tailor, was brought to court because he “being a singleman and not above 2 5 years of age, does take in work of tailoring and works by himself to the hindrance of other poor occupiers, contrary to the law.” 63

> The policy expanded employment by fostering underemployment. Employers in most trades were required to hire labor only by the year, not by the day or hour. 64 The intention was not only to see that a man’s master would have control of him throughout the year but to see that more men had masters, that more men had jobs. As the justices of Essex County observed, hiring labor by the day caused “the great depauperization of other labourers.” 65 But hiring by the year meant that a laborer did not have to work as hard or as long at any task as he would otherwise have had to. Work could be strung out to occupy needless amounts of time, because whether or not a master had work to occupy his servants, they had to stay with him and he had to keep them. The records show many instances of masters attempting to turn away a servant or apprentice before the stipulated term was up, only to have him sent back by the courts with orders that the master “entertain” him for the full period. We even have the extraordinary spectacle of the runaway master, the man who illegally fled from his servants and thus evaded his responsibility to employ and support them. 66

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1227-1256). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

A major problem was to get everyone to work. To create employment was a responsibility of the government. In England, propertied people were forced to take on workers, apprentices, etc... But also, traditions such as that each person should only have one job.

> In pursuit of its policy of fostering employment in the face of an expanding population, the government often had to create jobs in cases where society offered none. Sometimes men were obliged to take on a poor boy as a servant whether they needed one or not. The parish might lighten the burden of the appointed master by paying a fee, but it might also fine a man who refused to take a boy assigned to him. 67 To provide for men and women who could not be foisted off on unwilling employers, the government established houses of correction in every county, where the inmates toiled at turning wool, flax, and hemp into thread or yarn, receiving nothing but their food and lodging for their efforts. By all these means the government probably did succeed in spreading employment, but they spread it thin. In the long run their policies tended to depress wages and to diminish the amount of work expected from any one man. The division of labor, which economists have customarily regarded as a means of increasing productivity, could be instead a source of idleness. A man was supposed to have only one skill and was not supposed to impinge on the jobs of others by undertaking any task outside his province. Farmers with time on their hands were not to take up handicrafts on the side (though some did) because “for one man to be both an husbandman and an Artificer is a gatheringe of divers mens livinges into one mans hand.” 68 And even on the farm different tasks became the special province of men claiming a special skill in them. Such specialization increased the number of jobs; but unless an employer could time his jobs carefully, he might have some of his laborers idle, waiting for others to perform an operation necessary to their continued work. Plowing, for example, seems to have been a special skill— a plowman was paid at a higher rate than ordinary farm workers. But the ordinary laborer’s work might have to wait upon the plowing of a field, and a whole crew of men might be kept idle by a plowman’s failure to get his job done at the right time. For an ordinary laborer to have attempted the job himself would have been presumptuous and antisocial if not illegal.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1311-1326). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

But rise of capitalism constantly worked against employment.

> Rather than hire such help, men with capital preferred to invest in enterprises that required a minimum of labor. Large landowners, including the nobility, avoided the labor problem by renting out their land in small parcels instead of hiring men to work it for them. 73 Or they turned their arable land into pasture and enclosed it with fences where sheep could graze unattended. The result was fewer jobs, contrary to the aims of the government— and there were complaints that sheep were eating up the livelihood of men. But sheep at least went about cropping grass and growing wool more dependably than hired men would plow and plant.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1338-1343). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Conscious economic diversification. This is a slightly different spin than Ha Joon on this topic:

> Rather than hire such help, men with capital preferred to invest in enterprises that required a minimum of labor. Large landowners, including the nobility, avoided the labor problem by renting out their land in small parcels instead of hiring men to work it for them. 73 Or they turned their arable land into pasture and enclosed it with fences where sheep could graze unattended. The result was fewer jobs, contrary to the aims of the government— and there were complaints that sheep were eating up the livelihood of men. But sheep at least went about cropping grass and growing wool more dependably than hired men would plow and plant.

> Manufactures in this economy remained what the word itself implies: things made by hand. Labor was the principal cost in nearly every manufactured article. Employers engaged in manufacturing countered the shiftlessness of their workmen by paying starvation wages. They could get the cheapest labor in the woodland and pasture areas where the country’s hungry drifters trended. Here too was the wood needed for such varied enterprises as smelting and shipbuilding, the bark for tanning, and the cattle for hides to tan. Hence industries, such as they were, grew up mainly in the areas where cheap, irresponsible, hungry (and thirsty) labor guaranteed a low level of productivity. 74

> A possible exception was the woolen industry, the only industry that England supported on a large scale and the only one that furnished her with exports sizable enough to pay for the things like oil and pitch that she had to buy from other countries. Wool was spun and woven everywhere, perhaps more in the woodlands and pasture lands than elsewhere, but also in large-scale establishments in cities and towns. But the finer, more exacting processes of finishing and dyeing the cloth were beyond the skill of England’s listless laborers. Most English cloth was shipped abroad in an unfinished state, leaving the last, most lucrative stages of the business to foreigners. 75

> England’s mercantile dependence on this single export product had made her peculiarly vulnerable to economic depression. During the last half of the sixteenth century farsighted men had begun to see that one way to overcome the problem and to increase the number of jobs available for the growing population would be to increase the variety of the country’s exports. They introduced (with the assistance of Flemish artisans) new, lighter kinds of cloth for sale in warmer countries. They tried, not very successfully at first, to teach their laborers to finish the cloth. They expanded the production of coal and iron. They began to make glass, paper, brass, and gunpowder on a large scale. They brought in skilled foreigners to make things that Englishmen did not know how to make. 76 And they thought about acquiring colonies in America filled with loving native peoples and abounding in exotic natural products that all the world would crave as well as less exotic ones that England could not do without. In 1607 the Virginia Company was intent on presenting such a colony to England.

> Under the spur of imaginative patriots like the Hakluyts, men with capital had already for several decades been investing in overseas trading ventures, to the Levant, to the East Indies, to Russia (above which they had hoped to find a shorter route to the East); and many of the same men joined in the Virginia Company, which was also a trading venture. But in order to produce profits, Virginia could not be a mere trading post, like those which Englishmen were establishing in other parts of the world, where it was necessary only to unload English goods and take on native ones. Virginia would have to be an expansion of England itself, but with improvements. Englishmen would have to live there and themselves produce articles of trade that they could not or would not produce at home. The natives were expected to help, but first they would have to be shown how.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1338-1368). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Great closing paragraph of this chapter:

> The men, then, who sailed up the James River in the spring of 1607 bore a heavy burden of expectation. They were to create a biracial society that would remedy England’s deficiencies. In Virginia they faced a people who had some of the same shortcomings, as well as— from the English point of view at least— a few of their own. The Virginia Company had sent the idle to teach the idle. And they had sent, as it turned out, a quarrelsome band of gentlemen and servants to bring freedom to the free. It was a formula for disaster.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1368-1372). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

# 4 THE JAMESTOWN FIASCO

> THE first wave of Englishmen reached Virginia at Cape Henry, the southern headland at the opening of Chesapeake Bay, on April 26, 1607. The same day their troubles began. The Indians of the Cape Henry region (the Chesapeakes), when they found a party of twenty or thirty strangers walking about on their territory, drove them back to the ships they came on. It was not the last Indian victory, but it was no more effective than later ones. In spite of troubles, the English were there to stay. They spent until May 14 exploring Virginia’s broad waters and then chose a site that fitted the formula Hakluyt had prescribed. The place which they named Jamestown, on the James (formerly Powhatan) River, was inland from the capes about sixty miles, ample distance for warning of a Spanish invasion by sea. It was situated on a peninsula, making it easily defensible by land; and the river was navigable by oceangoing ships for another seventy-five miles into the interior, thus giving access to other tribes in case the local Indians should prove as unfriendly as the Chesapeakes. 1

> Captain Christopher Newport had landed the settlers in time to plant something for a harvest that year if they put their minds to it. After a week, in which they built a fort for protection, Newport and twenty-one others took a small boat and headed up the river on a diplomatic and reconnoitering mission, while the settlers behind set about the crucial business of planting corn. Newport paused at various Indian villages along the way and assured the people, as best he could, of the friendship of the English and of his readiness to assist them against their enemies. Newport gathered correctly from his attempted conversations that one man, Powhatan, ruled the whole area above Jamestown, as far as the falls at the present site of Richmond. His enemies, the Monacans, lived above the falls (where they might be difficult to reach if Powhatan proved unfriendly). Newport also surmised, incorrectly, that the Chesapeake Indians who had attacked him at Cape Henry were not under Powhatan’s dominion. He accordingly tried to make an alliance against the Chesapeakes and Monacans with a local chief whom he mistook for Powhatan. At the same time, he planted a cross with the name of King James on it (to establish English dominion) and tried to explain to the somewhat bewildered and justifiably suspicious owners of the country that one arm of the cross was Powhatan, the other himself, and that the fastening of them together signified the league between them. 2

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1543-1564). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

The confusing utter failure of the English to work. Why? Too many gentlemen, soldiers and rabble, not enough middle class.

> Skip over the first couple of years, when it was easy for Englishmen to make mistakes in the strange new world to which they had come, and look at Jamestown in the winter of 1609– 10. It is three planting seasons since the colony began. The settlers have fallen into an uneasy truce with the Indians, punctuated by guerrilla raids on both sides, but they have had plenty of time in which they could have grown crops. They have obtained corn from the Indians and supplies from England. They have firearms. Game abounds in the woods; and Virginia’s rivers are filled with sturgeon in the summer and covered with geese and ducks in the winter. There are five hundred people in the colony now. And they are starving. They scour the woods listlessly for nuts, roots, and berries. And they offer the only authentic examples of cannibalism witnessed in Virginia. One provident man chops up his wife and salts down the pieces. Others dig up graves to eat the corpses. By spring only sixty are left alive. 4

> Another scene, a year later, in the spring of 1611. The settlers have been reinforced with more men and supplies from England. The preceding winter has not been as gruesome as the one before, thanks in part to corn obtained from the Indians. 5 But the colony still is not growing its own corn. The governor, Lord De la Warr, weakened by the winter, has returned to England for his health. His replacement, Sir Thomas Dale, reaches Jamestown in May, a time when all hands could have been used in planting. Dale finds nothing planted except “some few seeds put into a private garden or two.” 6 And the people he finds at “their daily and usuall workes, bowling in the streetes.” 7

> It is evident that the settlers, failing to plant for themselves, depend heavily on the Indians for food. The Indians can finish them off at any time simply by leaving the area. And the Indians know it. One of them tells the English flatly that “we can plant any where … and we know that you cannot live if you want [i.e., lack] our harvest, and that reliefe we bring you.” 8 If the English drive out the Indians, they will starve.

> With that in mind, we look back a year on a scene in the summer following the starving, cannibal winter. It is August, when corn is ripening. The governor has been negotiating with Powhatan about some runaway Englishmen he is thought to be harboring. Powhatan returns “noe other then prowde and disdaynefull Answers,” and so the governor sends George Percy “to take Revendge upon the Paspeheans and Chiconamians [Chickahominies],” the tribes closest to Jamestown. Percy, the brother of the Earl of Northumberland and the perennial second in command at Jamestown, takes a group of soldiers up the James a few miles by boat and then marches inland three miles to the principal town of the Paspaheghs. They fall upon the town, kill fifteen or sixteen Indians, and capture the queen of the tribe and her children. 9 Percy then has his men burn the houses and “cutt downe their Corne groweinge about the Towne.” He takes the queen and her children back to his boats and embarks for Jamestown, but his men “begin to murmur becawse the quene and her Children weare spared.”

> Percy therefore obliges them by throwing the children overboard “and shoteinge owtt their Braynes in the water.” Meanwhile he sends another party under Captain James Davis to attack another Indian town (presumably a Chickahominy town), where again they cut down the corn and burn the houses. Upon returning to Jamestown, Percy hears that the governor is displeased that the queen of the Paspaheghs has been spared. Davis wants to burn her, but Percy, “haveinge seene so mutche Bloodshedd that day,” insists that she merely be put to the sword. So she is led away and stabbed.’ 10

Note above that they're even destroying Indian corn as they kill them. They could have at least saved the corn. i.e. they are even failing to just steal corn to live.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1571-1600). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

> Thus the English, unable or unwilling to feed themselves, continually demanding corn from theIndians, take pains to destroy both the Indians and their corn.

> One final scene. It is the spring of 1612, and Governor Dale is supervising the building of a fort at Henrico, near the present site of Richmond. He pauses to deal with some of his men, Englishmen, who have committed a serious crime. In the words of George Percy, “Some he apointed to be hanged Some burned Some to be broken upon wheles, others to be staked and some to be shott to death.” The reason for such extremities was the seriousness of the crime and the need to deter others from it: “all theis extreme and crewell tortures he used and inflicted upon them to terrify the reste for Attempting the Lyke.” What, then, was the crime these men had committed? They had run away to live with the Indians and had been recaptured. 11

> It is not easy to make sense out of the behavior displayed in these episodes. How to explain the suicidal impulse that led the hungry English to destroy the corn that might have fed them and to commit atrocities upon the people who grew it? And how to account for the seeming unwillingness or incapacity of the English to feed themselves? Although they had invaded Indian territory and quarreled with the owners, the difficulty of obtaining land was not great. The Indians were no match for English weapons. Moreover, since the Indians could afford to give up the land around Jamestown as well as Henrico without seriously endangering their own economy, they made no concerted effort to drive the English out. Although Indian attacks may have prevented the English from getting a crop into the ground in time for a harvest in the fall of 1607,12 the occasional Indian raids thereafter cannot explain the English failure to grow food in succeeding years. How, then, can we account for it?

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1601-1614). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Smith's role.

> Smith was not afraid of work himself; and in the absence of Indian slaves he bent his efforts as much toward getting work out of Englishmen as he did toward supplying their deficiencies from Indian larders. In these first years many Englishmen perceived that the Indians had a satisfactory way of living without much work, and they slipped away “to live Idle among the Salvages.” 19 Those who remained were so averse to any kind of labor, Smith reported, “that had they not beene forced nolens volens perforce to gather and prepare their victuall they would all have starved, and have eaten one another.” 20 While the governing council ruled, under the presidency of men of greater social prestige than Smith, he could make little headway against the jealousies and intrigues that greeted all his efforts to organize the people either for planting or for gathering food. But month by month other members of the council died or returned to England; and by the end of 1608 Smith was left in complete control. He divided the remaining settlers into work gangs and made them a little speech, in which he told them they could either work or starve: “Howsoever you have bin heretofore tolerated by the authoritie of the Councell from that I have often commanded you, yet seeing nowe the authoritie resteth wholly in my selfe; you must obay this for a law, that he that will not worke, shall not eate (except by sicknesse he be disabled).” 21 He did not except himself from the rule and assured them that “every one that gathereth not every day as much as I doe, the next daie shall be set beyond the river, and for ever bee banished from the fort, and live there or starve.” 22 And lest this only produce a general exodus to the Indians, Smith used his influence with the neighboring tribes to apply the same discipline to any settler who dared choose that course. As a result, in the winter of 1608– 9 he lost only seven or eight men. 23

> Had Smith been left in charge, it is not impossible that he would have achieved a society which, in one way or another, would have included the Indians. They might have had a role not much better than the Spanish assigned them, and they might have died as rapidly as the Arawaks from disease and overwork. But it is unlikely that the grisly scenes already described would have taken place (they all occurred after his departure). In spite of his eagerness to subdue the Indians, Smith was in continual contact and communication with them. He bullied and threatened and browbeat them, but we do not read of any atrocities committed upon them under his direction, nor did he feel obliged to hang, break, or burn any Englishman who went off to live with them.

But Smith lost his position because he was too pushy.

> But the Virginia Company in 1609 was not yet ready to abandon its goal of making its own way in Virginia and sharing the country with the Indians on more favorable terms than Smith would have allowed them. The members of the council who returned to England complained of Smith’s overbearing ways, with Englishmen as well as Indians. So the company decided not to leave the colony in the hands of so pushy a young man. At the same time, however, they recognized that the conciliar form of government was ineffective, and that a firmer authority was necessary to put their lazy colonists to work. They accordingly asked, and were given, a new charter, in which the king relinquished his government of the colony. Henceforth the company would have full control and would rule through a governor who would exercise absolute powers in the colony. He would be assisted by a council, but their advice would not be binding on him. In fact, he would be as much a military commander as a governor, and the whole enterprise would take on a more military character. 24

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1653-1680). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

The colony was allowed to govern itself now, under a governor, under a military system, all about work and discipline. Lots of death penalty: for stealing, trading privately.

> The Laws prescribed death for a variety of crimes, including rape, adultery, theft, lying, sacrilege, blasphemy, or doing or saying anything that might “tend to the derision” of the Bible. 27 On a more practical level, in order to increase the livestock which had by this time been brought over, the Laws made it death to kill any domestic animal, even a chicken. 28 It was also death, in weeding a garden, to take an ear of corn or a bunch of grapes from it, death too to trade privately with anyone on the ships that came to the colony. 29 And the punishments were inflicted with an arbitrary rigor that became a scandal. For stealing two or three pints of oatmeal a man had a needle thrust through his tongue and was then chained to a tree until he starved. 30

Indians were not included. The biracial dream was already officially given up now.

> The Laws did not even contemplate that the Indians would become a part of the English settlement. Though the company had frowned on Smith’s swashbuckling way with Indians, it was disenchanted with Powhatan and convinced that he and those under his dominion did need to be dealt with more sternly. Sir Thomas Gates was instructed to get some Indian children to bring up in the English manner, free of their parents’ evil influence. And he was also told to subjugate the neighboring tribes, to make them pay tribute, and to seize the chiefs of any that refused. If he wanted to make friends with any Indians, they must be “those that are farthest from you and enemies unto those amonge whom you dwell.” 31 The company’s new attitude was incorporated in several provisions of the Laws. When Indians came to Jamestown to trade or visit, they were to be placed under guard to prevent them from stealing anything; no inhabitant was to speak to them without the governor’s permission; and the settlers were forbidden on pain of death to “runne away from the Colonie, to Powhathan, or any savage Werowance else whatsoever.” 32 The company’s desire to bring the Indians into the community had given way to an effort to keep settlers and Indians apart.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1690-1706). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Too many gentlemen!

> Still another explanation for the improvidence of Virginia’s pioneers is one that John Smith often emphasized, namely, the character of the immigrants. They were certainly an odd assortment, for the most conspicuous group among them was an extraordinary number of gentlemen. Virginia, as a patriotic enterprise, had excited the imagination of England’s nobility and gentry. The shareholders included 32 present or future earls, 4 countesses, and 3 viscounts (all members of the nobility) as well as hundreds of lesser gentlemen, some of them perhaps retainers of the larger men. 41 Not all were content to risk only their money. Of the 105 settlers who started the colony, 36 could be classified as gentlemen. In the first “supply” of 120 additional settlers, 28 were gentlemen, and in the second supply of 70, again 28 were gentlemen. 42 These numbers gave Virginia’s population about six times as large a proportion of gentlemen as England had.

> Gentlemen, by definition, had no manual skill, nor could they be expected to work at ordinary labor. They were supposed to be useful for “the force of knowledge, the exercise of counsell”; 43 but to have ninety-odd wise men offering advice while a couple of hundred did the work was inauspicious, especially when the wise men included “many unruly gallants packed thether by their friends to escape il destinies” at home. 44

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1753-1764). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Good quotes about gentlemen:

> What was worse, the gentlemen were apparently accompanied by the personal attendants that gentlemen thought necessary to make life bearable even in England. The colony’s laborers “were for most part footmen, and such as they that were Adventurers brought to attend them, or such as they could perswade to goe with them, that never did know what a dayes worke was.” 45 Smith complained that he could never get any real work from more than thirty out of two hundred, and he later argued that of all the people sent to Virginia, a hundred good laborers “would have done more than a thousand of those that went.” 46 Samuel Argall and John Rolfe also argued that while a few gentlemen would have been useful to serve as military leaders, “to have more to wait and play

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1764-1770). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Skilled laborers came, but wouldn't work outside of their trade -- even when about to starve.

> The first “supply” in 1608 had six tailors, two goldsmiths, two refiners, two apothecaries, a blacksmith, a gunner (i.e., gunsmith?), a cooper, a tobacco pipe maker, a jeweler, and a perfumer. 52 There were doubtless others, and being skilled they expected to be paid and fed for doing the kind of work for which they had been hired. Some were obviously useful. But others may have found themselves without means to use their special talents. If they were conscientious, the jeweler may have spent some time looking for jewels, the goldsmiths for gold, the perfumer for something to make perfume with. But when the search proved futile, it did not follow that they should or would exercise their skilled hands at any other tasks. It was not suitable for a perfumer or a jeweler or a goldsmith to put his hand to the hoe. Rather, they could join the gentlemen in genteel loafing while a handful of ordinary laborers worked at the ordinary labor of growing and gathering food.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1790-1797). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Back in England, they didn't understand that it was going to be very difficult to stay alive. And that was understandable because this wasn't a huge problem back in England.

> The company, then, partly by choice, partly by necessity, sent to the colony an oversupply of men who were not prepared to tackle the work essential to settling in a wilderness. In choosing prospective Virginians, the company did not look for men who would be particularly qualified to keep themselves alive in a new land. The company never considered the problem of staying alive in Virginia to be a serious one. And why should they have? England’s swarming population had had ample experience in moving to new areas and staying alive. The people who drifted north and west into the pasture-farming areas got along, and the lands there were marginal, far poorer than those that awaited the settlers of tidewater Virginia. Though there may have been some farmers among the early settlers, no one for whom an occupation is given was listed as a husbandman or yeoman. And though thirty husbandmen were included in the 1611 list of men wanted, few came. As late as 1620 the colony reported “a great scarcity, or none at all” of “husbandmen truely bred,” by which was meant farmers from the arable regions. 54 In spite of the experience at Roanoke and in spite of the repeated starving times at Jamestown, the company simply did not envisage the provision of food as a serious problem. They sent some food supplies with every ship but never enough to last more than a few months. After that people should be able to do for themselves.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1801-1810). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

The colony was supposed to be a place to make lots of manufactures etc.. Which is interesting. This was really a capitalist enterprise.

But -- they really didn't know how to exploit labor. They were only working 3-6 hours in winter and 5 to 8 in summer.

> The predicament of those in charge is reflected in the hours of work they prescribed for the colonists, which contrast sharply with those specified in the English Statute of Artificers. There was no point in demanding dawn-to-dusk toil unless there was work worth doing. When John Smith demanded that men work or starve, how much work did he demand? By his own account, “4 hours each day was spent in worke, the rest in pastimes and merry exercise.” 55 The governors who took charge after the reorganization of 1609 were equally modest in their demands. William Strachey, who was present, described the work program under Gates and De la Warr in the summer of 1610:

> "It is to be understood that such as labor are not yet so taxed but that easily they perform the same and ever by ten of the clock they have done their morning’s work: at what time they have their allowances [of food] set out ready for them, and until it be three of the clock again they take their own pleasure, and afterward, with the sunset, their day’s labor is finished." 56

> The Virginia Company offered much the same account of this period. According to a tract issued late in 1610, “the setled times of working (to effect all themselves, or the Adventurers neede desire) [require] no more pains then from sixe of clocke in the morning untill ten, and from two of the clocke in the afternoone till foure.” 57 The long lunch period described here was spelled out in the Lawes Divine, Morall and Martiall. If we calculate the total hours demanded of the work gangs between the various beatings of the drum, they come to roughly five to eight hours a day in summer and three to six hours in winter. 58 And it is not to be supposed that these hours refer only to work done in the fields and that the men were expected to work at other tasks like building houses during the remainder of the day. The Laws indicate that at the appointed hours every laborer was to repair to his work “and every crafts man to his occupation, Smiths, Joyners, Carpenters, Brick makers, etc.” 59 Nor did military training occupy the time not spent in working. The Laws provided for different groups to train at different times and to be exempt from work during the training days. 60 Although colonists and historians alike have condemned the Laws as harsh, and with reason, the working hours that the code prescribed sound astonishingly short to modern ears. They certainly fell way below those demanded at the time in English law; and they seem utterly irrational in a chronically starving community.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1827-1848). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Did they NOT grow corn because the Indians DID?

> To have grown enough corn to feed the colony would have required only a fraction of the brief working time specified, 61 yet it was not grown. Even in their free time men shunned the simple planting tasks that sufficed for the Indians. And the very fact that the Indians did grow corn may be one more reason why the colonists did not. For the Indians presented a challenge that Englishmen were not prepared to meet, a challenge to their image of themselves, to their self-esteem, to their conviction of their own superiority over foreigners, and especially over barbarous foreigners like the Irish and the Indians.

> If you were a colonist, you knew that your technology was superior to the Indians’. You knew that you were civilized, and they were savages. It was evident in your firearms, your clothing, your housing, your government, your religion. The Indians were supposed to be overcome with admiration and to join you in extracting riches from the country. But your superior technology had proved insufficient to extract anything. The Indians, keeping to themselves, laughed at your superior methods and lived from the land more abundantly and with less labor than you did. They even furnished you with the food that you somehow did not get around to growing enough of yourselves. To be thus condescended to by heathen savages was intolerable. And when your own people started deserting in order to live with them, it was too much. If it came to that, the whole enterprise of Virginia would be over. So you killed the Indians, tortured them, burned their villages, burned their cornfields. It proved your superiority in spite of your failures. And you gave similar treatment to any of your own people who succumbed to the savage way of life. But you still did not grow much corn. That was not what you had come to Virginia for.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1856-1861). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

People got a ton of land. This was all about creating property owners. That's why people were coming, and that's the reward the Company was OK to give out. Because land was so cheap. And also because people tended to die very quickly -- so the "seasoned" didn't feel like they were giving up too much -- since most of the people coming over would die.

# 5 THE PERSISTENT VISION

> THE Englishmen who invested their money in the Virginia Company’s high purpose were naturally disappointed in the colony’s failure to live up to expectations. But they were not sure what, if anything, to do about it. By 1618 they were divided into factions. One group, led by Sir Thomas Smith, was composed of big merchants, for whom Virginia was only one of many ongoing enterprises. These men, who had dominated the company’s counsels hitherto, could afford to regard Virginia as a long-term investment in which one need not look for immediate success. They were disappointed with the results thus far achieved and with the settlers’ new addiction to tobacco, but they were willing to wait for Smith, who had been highly successful in other ventures, to bring this one to fruition. 1

> Another group of members, led by Lord Robert Rich and his son, the future Earl of Warwick, were also willing to wait for returns on their investment. Their immediate interest in the colony lay less in direct profits from the settlers there than in the protection the colony could afford their ships. In spite of James I’s policy of peace with Spain, Rich and his associates were continuing the lucrative war of attrition begun by Hawkins and Drake. By obtaining privateering commissions from petty principalities like Savoy, they gave a color of legality to piratical cruises against Spanish shipping. But it was difficult to conduct such voyages from England without running into trouble with the king. Rich saw in Virginia a convenient base from which to strike the Caribbean. Bermuda, where the Virginia Company had planted another small settlement (on the grounds that Bermuda fell within the boundaries of the company’s charter), could serve the same purpose. As long as Virginia and Bermuda furnished a haven for their ships, Rich and his friends were not overly troubled by the failure to produce iron or silk or glass or any other commodity.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 1973-1989). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

The new program...

The government in England and the Company was not excited about tobacco. It was a vice.

The colony grew the new world's first assembly -- basically as a way of getting taxes.

The governor and other office holders got big chunks of land and tenants/servants to make it so that they didn't need to "prey upon the people."

They tried to get back on a better course with Indians.

But tobacco went wild.

# 6 BOOM

> FROM what little can be discovered about the value of a man’s labor in Virginia in the 1620s, it is not hard to see why the demand for servants was high, even in the face of a food scarcity. At the time when Sandys took over the company and began pouring men into the colony, Virginia had just begun to ship tobacco in quantity to the English market. The prices it brought were considerably lower than those for Spanish tobacco, but high enough to excite the cupidity of every settler. In the colony in 1619 the best grade sold for export at three shillings a pound. 1 In 1623 what reached England was worth no more than half that, and in bartering within the colony (where it had already become the principal medium of exchange) it was said to be valued at less than a shilling a pound. 2 In a lawsuit recorded in 1624 it was reckoned at two shillings a pound, and in 1625 at three shillings again. 3 The boom lasted until 1629 or 1630, when the price tumbled to a penny a pound. 4 Though it recovered somewhat in ensuing years, it never again reached the dizzy heights of the 1620s. During that decade the profits from tobacco were enough to keep all the colonists growing as much of it as they could, in spite of every effort to turn them to other products.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 2327-2339). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Everyone went nuts and grew as much tobacco as they could. NOW they were working hard. But only on tobacco, still not growing their own food. All of Gov Sandy's improvement projects "vanished into smoke" -- that is, into tobacco.

Tobacco became currency -- and stayed that was for a long time.

The boom was like a gold rush, where all these rabble were now walking around drunk in silk clothes. The assembly passed laws making people not dress so fancy.

Totally transient, drunk, all male. Just a stopping place. Not a real colony.

Even self-preservation came second. They couldn't leave their tobacco to fight Indians.

How hard it was to stay free: Everyone was vulnerable. If you arrived free but without enough provision, you'd become a servant. If you were kidnapped and someon paid your ransom, you'd be their slave. Good example:

> Some planters were not above ransoming captives from the Indians in order to claim their labor. Jane Dickenson and her husband, Ralph, were tenants of Nicholas Hide, when Ralph was killed in the massacre of 1622 and Jane carried into captivity. After some time Dr. John Pott, the physician who had been sent to Virginia at company expense, ransomed Jane for two pounds of glass beads. Ten months after her deliverance she complained to the governor and council that she was held in a servitude that “differeth not from her slavery with the Indians,” Dr. Pott alleging that she was “linked to his servitude with a towefold Chaine the one for her late husbands obligation [to Hide] and thother for her ransome, of both which shee hopeth that in Conscience shee ought to be discharged, of the first by her widdowhood, of the second by the law of nations, Considering shee hath already served teen months, tow much for two pound of beades.” 40 Other complaints reached London that “divers old Planters and others did allure and beguile divers younge persons and others (ignorant and unskillfull in such matters) to serve them upon intollerable and unchristianlike conditions upon promises of such rewardes and recompence, as they were no wayes able to performe nor ever meant.” 41

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 2468-2477). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Lots of other examples of vunerability here!

Most servants in America were in the condition of the worst-off servants in England, the "parish apprentice."

It was reported in England that servants were abused in "hard usage." This was all after the boom and the tobacco economy really got going. The machine needed to get going.

Lots of stories and examples of beatings and mistreatment of servants. For example:

> The records are not sufficiently complete to show how extensive the abuse may have been, but the council in Virginia (until 1634 the only court) supported masters in severities that would not have been allowed in England. The most extreme example is the case of John and Alice Proctor and their servants Elizabeth Abbott and Elias Hinton, both of whom died after a series of beatings inflicted by the Proctors and by other servants acting under orders from the Proctors. 87 Thomas Gates testified that he counted five hundred lashes inflicted on the girl at one time and warned Proctor that he might as well kill her and be done with it. Alice Bennett, who examined her, “fownd she had been sore beaten and her body full of sores and holes very dangerously raunckled and putrified both above her wast and uppon her hips and thighes.” Other witnesses testified that Proctor beat Hinton with a rake. Yet there is no indication that the Proctors were punished. Even the compassionate witnesses who testified against them indicated that when the maid came to them for shelter they had instead returned her to her master and mistress in her half-dead condition, with entreaties that they pardon her! By contrast, we find English courts undertaking the work of correcting unruly servants themselves (as the statutes required) and even on occasion forbidding masters to do it. 88

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 2646-2655). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

In England, servants sold their services in annual hiring fairs. But in America masters sold their servants -- like Englishmen sold land or chattel. Basically a slave market. Masters gambled servants in cards.

> Englishmen dealt in land or chattels. This development was a simple outgrowth of the extreme demand for labor in combination with the long terms of service that were exacted for transportation to Virginia. In England itself, after labor became more valuable, the demand produced a certain amount of buying and selling of industrial apprentices. When a man had more apprentices than he needed, he might with the permission of his guild sell an apprentice to another master of the guild. 92 But industrial apprentices were a special case, and the idea of a large-scale market in men, or at least in English men, was shocking to Englishmen. “My Master Atkins,” wrote Thomas Best from Virginia in 1623, “hath sold me for a £ 150 sterling like a damnd slave.” 93 This “buying and selling men and boies” had already become a scandal by 1619, when John Rolfe noted that it “was held in England a thing most intolerable.” 94 Captain John Smith denounced the “pride, covetousnesse, extortion, and oppression” of men who sold “even men, women and children for who will give most.” It would be better, he said, that these profiteers be “made such merchandize themselves, then suffered any longer to use that trade.” 95 And in 1625 Thomas Weston refused to carry servants in his ship from Canada to Virginia, because “servants were sold heere upp and downe like horses, and therfore he held it not lawfull to carie any.” 96

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 2666-2678). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

Here are lots of examples of how the pattern of slavery was set with English servants in America.

And the germ of race hatred had begun then too, just waiting to be used.

The death penalty for going to live with Indians was dropped because no one was doing it anymore. There was enough animosity now.

# BOOK II: A New Deal

## 7 SETTLING DOWN

Slavery could have/ should have developed in Virgina around tobacco during the boom. It was under the same circumstances two decades later that it developed in Barbados around the sugar boom. But basically, they couldn't because they didn't have enough Africans and hadn't developed clear enough racial division yet to make them slaves. And English people were protected from only one kind of abuse: lifetime slavery and slavery that passed to children. That one protection was a big deal. And Africans would not have it. They almost had it, but in the end didn't have it. Indians had had it for a moment, but then it was taken away.

> IT would not have been surprising if slavery had developed swiftly in Virginia during the booming 1620s, when tobacco prices were high enough to inspire the same overpowering greed that moved the Spaniards on Hispaniola. Two decades later Englishmen in Barbados turned to slavery in as short a time, in order to exploit the island’s newly discovered capacity for producing sugar. But in Virginia, although the tobacco barons of the 1620s bought and sold and beat their servants in a manner that shocked other Englishmen, they did not reduce them to slavery, as we understand the term. And Virginians did not import shiploads of African slaves to solve their labor problem until half a century more had passed. Perhaps if the boom had continued, they would have; but when it collapsed, they relaxed a little in their pursuit of riches and began to think about making the best of life in the new land.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 2879-2888). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

If the boom had kept up, maybe they would have developed slavery. But the boom collapsed.

They tried all sorts of stupid laws to force the price of tobacco up -- none worked.

When the boom was done, then people turned their attention to settling down and creating a settled society.

And then something crazy happened. From 1650's on, the population started to grow seriously. A bunch of things had just fallen into place: knowledge, *pasture animals*, wiping out wolves, families.

Animals were helped by a 6-mile palisade that ... I don't quite understand.

In the beginning they had shephards, but in 1653 they passed a fencing law that allowed pasture animals and hogs to boom. **This is a good example of how a smart rule change can lead to massive progress.** Cattle became a central pillar of wealth. Cattle marks system.

Cattle reproduced. And just ate the common grass. So a small investment really paid off. There are bunch of records of increase of cattle that can be gleaned from wills etc...

Virtually everyone in VA grew corn, cattle and tobacco.

But there were specialists to build mills, ships, etc... But there were never enough. They had to burn houses to harvest nails.

SLAVES... In the beginning, many slaves owned property, bought their childrens' freedom, were promised freedom as an incentive.

> "labor. In 1645 Edwin Connaway, clerk of the Northampton court, in a remarkable deposition declared: That being at the house of Capt. Taylor, about the Tenth day of July last past the said Capt. Taylor in the morning went into the quartering house and this deponent coming forth of the dwelling house did see Capt. Taylor and Anthony the negro goeing into the Corne Feild and when they returned from the said Corne Feild, the said negro told this deponent saying now Mr. Taylor and I have devided our Corne And 1 am very glad of it now I know myne owne, hee finds fault with mee that I doe not worke but now I know myne owne ground I will worke when I please and play when I please, And the said Capt. Taylor asked the said Negro saying are you content with what you have And the Negro answered saying I am very well content with what I have or words to that effect." 76

> While racial feelings undoubtedly affected the position of Negroes, there is more than a little evidence that Virginians during these years were ready to think of Negroes as members or potential members of the community on the same terms as other men and to demand of them the same standards of behavior. Black men and white serving the same master worked, ate, and slept together, and together shared in escapades, escapes, and punishments. In 1649 William Watts, a white man, and Mary, a Negro servant, were required to do penance for fornication, like any other couple, by standing in the church at Elizabeth River with the customary white sheet and white wand; and in 1654 the churchwardens of the upper parish in Northampton presented both a white couple and a Negro couple for fornication. 77

> There are several cases where masters set up conditions in their wills whereby Negro slaves would become free or could purchase their freedom. And the terms indicate an expectation that they would become regular members of the free community. Argali Yeardley provided that a Negro boy, then aged three, should be free at the age of twenty-four and be given two cows. The boy’s godfather was made a witness to the agreement. 78 Richard Vaughan provided that each of his three Negro girls should “bee brought upp in the feare of god and to bee taught to reade and make her owne cloaths.” When they came of age, they were each to get two cows with calf, and two suits of clothes, two blankets, a rug, a bed, four barrels of corn, and a breeding sow; together they were to have a plantation of 444 acres with a new house 25 feet by 20 feet. 79

> The success of these early efforts at integration is nowhere more dramatically shown than in the behavior of Anthony Longo, a free Negro who had learned not only the merits of industry and thrift but also the truculent attitude to authority which so many Englishmen carried wherever they went and which the courts had so often to put down. One John Neene was sent by Major Walker, a commissioner of the court, to serve a warrant or subpoena on Longo in connection with a case in which Neene needed Longo’s testimony. Neene reported his experience in these words:

> "Sayth that comeinge to Tony Llongo his house with a warrent of Major Walkers your Deponent asked him whether hee would goe alonge to Mr. Walkers with mee. his answere was what shall I goe to Mr. Walkers for: goe about your business you idle Rascall: Upon those slightinge tearmes, I told him I had a warrant for him, sayeinge, will you goe with that, hee made mee answer, shitt of your warrant have I (said hee) nothinge to doe but goe to Mr. Walker, goe about your business you idle Rascall as did likewise his wife, with such noyse that I could hardly heare my owne words, reading the warrant to them, which when I had done readeinge, the said Tony stroke att mee, and gave mee some blowes, soe perseavinge it was to little purpose to staye with him, I went to Mr. Littleton’s house and requested Daniel Baker to goe to Tony Longos with mee only to testifie that I had a warrant from Mr. Walker for his appearance before him; Daniel Baker att my request went with mee which when wee came, I desired him to read it to him which he did his answers were that hee would not goe, hee must gather his corne, Nowe it beinge about the sun settinge (or somethinge after) I told him wee might goe to night and neither hinder himselfe much, nor mee, But his answer was thats a goode one nowe I have bine att worke shall goe to Mr. Walkers I your said deponent requested him to goe alonge with mee And as I could not make my debt appear I would give him for his payment 20 lb of tobacco. Well said hee I cannot goe, why when shall I attend you said your deponent tomorrowe or next daye, or next weeake Ile goe with you att any time his answer was in generall, well, well, Ile goe when my corne is in whereupon I bad him goodnight, and left him, and on the morneinge returned the warrant. All which to the best of my remembrance were his very words (or to same effect)." 80

> The commissioners understandably punished Longo for contempt of court. 81 But it was the kind of contempt that Englishmen often showed to authority, and it was combined with an assiduity in pursuit of calling that English moralists were doing their best to inculcate more widely at home. As England had absorbed people of every nationality over the centuries and turned them into Englishmen, Virginia’s Englishmen were absorbing their own share of foreigners, including Negroes, and molding a New World community on the English model, a pasture-farming empire stretched out and magnified, altered by the nature of the terrain and the universal preoccupation with tobacco but still recognizably English. Yet this empire upon closer examination will be found more different from England than at first appears.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 3200-3213). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.


## 8 LIVING WITH DEATH

There was SO MUCH death in the beginning -- it was very different from any later period. After 1625 the population began increasing, but with a very high death rate anyways. This has been overlooked by historians.

> THE most obvious difference between Virginia and England was the abundance of land and the absence of people. The native population which might have made the two countries radically different was small to begin with and became rapidly smaller under the onslaught of European diseases and weapons. Once the English pushed the remnants out of the way, they had several million acres of fertile tidewater lands available for a mere handful of settlers. The relative abundance of land and the shortage of people would shape Virginian— and American— history for centuries to come. But during the colony’s first half century the shortage of people was different in kind from any experienced in Americans’ later absorption of the continent. It was not just that the colony was new. It was not just a matter of time, needed to build up the stream of immigrants. It was a matter of death. The rich lands of the tidewater were empty not simply for lack of immigrants but because the men who did come to settle on them died so fast. We have seen that after 1625 the colony grew rapidly. But the growth was achieved in the face of a continuing death rate of appalling proportions.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 3426-3437). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

All the death created a situation in which everyone who lived very long got married several times.

Which gave rise to a rise of a "widowocracy" -- because so much property passed through widows.

Often contracts done by fathers for their daughters gave them control over their estates. Law already allowed widows lifetime use of 1/3 of estates - but contracts often gave them more.

> The wealthy widow has always had an edge on competitors in the marriage market. In Virginia the death rate produced such a rapid turnover of husbands and wives that widowhood became a principal means for the concentration of wealth. It has been suggested that the men who made their way to the top in the 1620s and 1630s in Virginia were unable to perpetuate their family lines; the famous first families of Virginia came to the colony later. 37 In a patrilineal sense this was the case. But while the high mortality lasted, with women apparently resisting it more successfully than men, Virginia was on the way to becoming an economic matriarchy, or rather a widowarchy. The man who needed capital could get it most easily by marrying a widow. And she was likely to get it back again, with whatever return he had added to it, when he died. The next husband would have an even larger base to build on.

> We can sometimes watch the process taking place among the more successful planters, whose extensive holdings brought them frequently into the court records. One of the men, for example, who made it to the top in Virginia in the late 1620s and early 1630s was Adam Thorowgood. Though he came as a servant, he was of good family and in 1627 married Sarah Offley, daughter of a London merchant and granddaughter of a Lord Mayor. Thorowgood died in 1640 at the age of 38. Within a year Sarah married Captain John Gookin, whose father had established one of the largest particular plantations under the Virginia Company. John Gookin died in 1643 at the age of 30. Sarah stayed single for four years, playing the grande dame of Norfolk at her house on Lynnhaven Bay. In 1647 she married Francis Yeardley, aged 23, son of Sir George Yeardley, the former governor. She saw to it that most of their property would be hers and not included in the estate if he should die before her, which he did, at the age of 31. Something of her scale of living can be judged from the fact that five years after their marriage Francis traded seven head of cattle to buy jewelry for her (which did not include a diamond necklace that she had at her death). 38

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 3553-3568). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

There was an amazing practice that grew up for orphans: the state gave them cows -- kind of a capital investment. And then their guardians would get the male increase of the cattle. Now people were competing to be guardians. And there was a lot of temptation to take more than the male increase. The assembly therefore created an "orphans' court" to watch out for them -- to render account of what there was.

Land had no value back then. It would be worth a ton soon -- but no one knew that. Head rights. Sold cheaply.

Tobacco was the main currency. But it could rot. Was often held up in court and would rot.

Cattle was the most secure and stable kind of property. A lot of energy had to go in to protecting cattle though.

Servants were the most valuable property, but they died so often. They were bought and sold based on, among other criteria, their life expectancy. i.e. a seasoned servant with 3 years left might be worth more than a new one with 7 years left to serve.

i.e. it was all very unstable. But...

> In spite of the handicaps thus imposed by mortality and by the evanescence of property, Virginians did manage in the decades after 1630 to bring a measure of stability to their economic transactions. In the absence of coin they made tobacco their principal medium of exchange, and because it was so perishable a medium, they often made their exchanges in advance, in promissory notes stated in pounds of tobacco “payable at the next crop.” Big men, who could take the risk, became merchant planters. They bought shiploads of English goods and supplied their neighbors with clothes and tools in return for such notes. Thus Hugh Yeo, a merchant planter on the Eastern Shore, in April, 1647, supplied seventeen persons there with goods valued at a total of 9,469 pounds of tobacco payable the following October. 72 Even fines levied as punishments by the courts were made payable at the next crop. 73 Although the system was simple, its operation was complicated by the death rate. A not uncommon case occurred in the Norfolk court when the clerk recorded a suit for 966 pounds of tobacco against John Laurence because he had married the widow of John Stratton who was the security for a debt due to Thomas Bridge, because Bridge had married the widow of George Bateman who had married the widow of John Holmes to whom the debt was originally owed. 74 With the parties dying off so rapidly, it was easy to lose the documents and difficult to keep track of who owed what to whom. Frequently the courts had to arbitrate disputes on the basis of oral testimony from witnesses to a transaction.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 3729-3741). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

> Thus Virginians built a local system of credit and exchange that recognized their peculiar conditions of life and created a kind of stability out of instability. Virginia could not quite be England. As long as the heavy mortality lasted it must be vastly different. Yet the differences were not all in England’s favor. The very abundance of land and scarcity of people that made land a poor investment gave Virginia an irresistible attraction for ordinary men. Land was the anchor of every Englishman’s hope for security, and English political philosophers attributed their country’s freedom to the vigilance of its landowners, whose representatives in Parliament could curb the tyranny of ambitious monarchs. But in England the landowners were few, while in Virginia anyone who survived his seasoning and service could take up a plot, grow his crop, make his voice heard in voting for representatives, and perhaps even aspire to represent his neighbors in the House of Burgesses. Those who survived learned to live with the other risks, even to overcome most of them. And when mortality finally began to decline, it looked for a time as though Virginia might become the center of a New World empire where Englishmen and English liberty would thrive together.

Morgan, Edmund S. (2003-10-17). American Slavery, American Freedom (Kindle Locations 3767-3776). W. W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.






