# Crisis Economics: A Crash Course in the Future of Finance
by Nouriel Roubini, Stephen Mihm

_(Last annotated on June 4, 2014)_

> In 1933 John Maynard Keynes declared, “The decadent international but individualistic capitalism, in the hands of which we found ourselves after the [First World] war, is not a success. It is not intelligent, it is not beautiful, it is not just, it is not virtuous—and it doesn’t deliver the goods. In short we dislike it, and we are beginning to despise it. But when we wonder what to put in its place, we are extremely perplexed.” (location 233)

> And in global markets there was a surplus of savings from Japan, Germany, China, and a range of emerging economies. All that savings had to be invested somewhere, and in the end, it went into purchasing debt generated by the United States. But the low rates of return on the federal government’s short-term and long-term debt understandably caused investors to prefer debt paying a higher rate of return. So they purchased the debt of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, along with the mortgage-backed securities guaranteed by those institutions. All were implicitly guaranteed by the U.S. Treasury. (location 1431)

> But overseas investors did not stop there. Private creditors of the United States—particularly investors and financial institutions in Europe—became major purchasers of securitized products. Estimates vary, but between 40 and 50 percent of the securities generated by American financial institutions ended up in the portfolios of foreign (location 1435)

> The Lure of Leverage (location 1450)

Note: this section explains a lot of terms etc about debt and has us debt facts

> Let’s recall Minsky’s taxonomy of borrowers (see chapter 2). The most conservative are the hedge borrowers, whose short-term income flow can cover payments not only of interest but of principal too. More risky are the speculative borrowers, whose income can cover only payments on interest; they must roll over the principal each time it comes due. Most dangerous are the Ponzi borrowers, who can service neither the principal nor the interest and must take on new debt just to stay afloat. Minsky grasped an essential truth: that an economy would become vulnerable to collapse should its various players resort to debt to finance their activities. He believed that the greater the reliance on debt and leverage, the more fragile the financial system. (location 1450)

> “The financial crisis is above all an American problem,” and added, “The other G7 financial ministers in continental Europe share this opinion.” But a few days later much of the European banking system effectively (location 2020)

> mortgages and corporate loans from banks in more established countries. They had turned to those banks because the interest rates on euros, Swiss francs, and even Japanese yen were lower than the rates available in their own countries. Firms in Russia, Korea, and Mexico used the same borrowing strategy. But when the crisis hit and investors fled from emerging-market currencies to safe havens like the dollar, the euro, and the yen, the cost of servicing those debts went through the roof, putting enormous strains on the emerging-market economies. (location 2169)

> “owns” these assets via its control of three limited-liability corporations known as Maiden Lane I, II, and III. Each is privately administered by BlackRock Financial Management. This highly unusual arrangement has attracted considerable criticism—and skepticism. It is also without precedent in the history of the Federal Reserve. Taken together, all these actions (location 2690)

> The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public vs. Private Myths in Risk and Innovation (Anthem Other Canon Economics) by Mariana Mazzucato

_(Last annotated on June 1, 2014)_

> Businessmen have a different set of delusions from politicians, and need, therefore, different handling. They are, however, much milder than politicians, at the same time allured and terrified by the glare of publicity, easily persuaded to be ‘patriots’, perplexed, bemused, indeed terrified, yet only too anxious to take a cheerful view, vain perhaps but very unsure of themselves, pathetically responsive to a kind word. You could do anything you liked with them, if you would treat them (even the big ones), not as wolves or tigers, but as domestic animals by nature, even though they have been badly brought up and not trained (location 519)

> Governments have always been lousy at picking winners, and they are likely to become more so, as legions of entrepreneurs and tinkerers swap designs online, turn them into products at home and market them globally from a garage. As the revolution rages, governments should stick to the basics: better schools for a skilled workforce, clear rules and a level playing field for enterprises of all kinds. Leave the rest to the revolutionaries. Economist (2012) Across the globe we are hearing that the State has to be cut back in order to foster a post-crisis recovery. The assumption is that, with the State in the (location 679)

> in with the UK government’s broader theme of the Big Society, where responsibility for the delivery of public services is shifted away from the State to individuals operating either on their own or by coming together through the third sector – with the justification that (location 690)

> Start-up stage 53.0% Second stage 33.7% Third stage 20.1% Bridge or pre-public stage 20.9% Source: Pierrakis (2010). Figure 2. Stages of venture (location 1274)

> that VC is itself becoming one of its own worst enemies by being such adamant lobbyists for a lower public purse (via lower taxes), which will not be able to fund the future (location 1311)

> Subsequent elaborations of the ‘Developmental State’ concept can be found in, among others, Wade (1990), Chang (1993), Evans (1995), Woo-Cumings (1999) and Chang and Evans (2000). Recently, contrary to Johnson’s (1982) original view, Block (2008) showed the existence of an often ‘hidden’ Developmental State in the US, a view similarly espoused by Reinert (2007) and Chang (2008). (location 1429)

> During a recent visit to the United States, French President François Mitterrand stopped to tour California’s Silicon Valley, where he hoped to learn more about the ingenuity and entrepreneurial drive that gave birth to so many companies there. Over lunch, Mitterrand listened as Thomas Perkins, a partner in the venture capital fund that started Genentech Inc., extolled the virtues of the risk-taking investors who finance the entrepreneurs. Perkins was cut off by Stanford University Professor Paul Berg, who won a Nobel Prize for work in genetic engineering. He asked, ‘Where were you guys in the ’50s and ’60s when all the funding had to be done in the basic science? Most of the discoveries that have fuelled [the industry] were created back then.’ Henderson and Schrage, in the Washington Post (1984) (location 1440)

> Not all innovations lead to economy-wide growth. Economy-wide growth is generally caused by new products or processes that have an impact on a wide variety of sectors in the economy, as was the case with the rise with electricity and computers. These are what macroeconomists call general purpose technologies (GPTs). GPTs are characterized by three core qualities: •  They are pervasive in that they spread into many sectors. •  They improve over time and should keep lowering the cost to their users. • They make it easier to spawn innovation through the invention and production of new products or processes (Grossman and Helpman 1991). (location 1521)

> Ruttan (2006) argues that large-scale and long-term government investment has been the engine behind almost every GPT in the last century. He analysed the development of six different technology complexes (the US ‘mass production’ system, aviation technologies, space technologies, information technology, (location 1528)

> Florida and Browdy argued that this pattern of the inability of private actors to build or sustain manufacturing capabilities in various high-technology fields presented a broader problem with the nation’s innovation system: The loss of this [TFT-LCD] display technology reveals fundamental weaknesses of the U.S. high-technology system. Not only did our large corporations lack the vision and the persistence to turn this invention into a marketable product, but the venture capital financiers, who made possible such high-technology industries as semiconductors and personal computers, failed too. Neither large nor small firms were able to match a dazzling innovation with the manufacturing muscle needed for commercial production. (1991, 43) (location 2260)

> In an attempt to retain the manufacturing of TFT-LCDs in the US, the Advanced Display Manufacturers of America Research Consortium (ADMARC) was established by the major display manufacturers with initial funding appearing from the National Institute of Standards and Technology’s (NIST) Advanced Technology Program (ATP) (Florida and Browdy 1991). The industry also received additional assistance from the US government in the form of antidumping tariffs (while at the same time touting the ‘free competition’ line), as well as funds and contracts provided by various military or civilian agencies that supported many start-ups in the US as part of an effort to develop manufacturing capabilities of TFT-LCDs in the 1990s (OTA 1995). (location 2267)

Note: even with subsidies industry didn't build flat panel displays

> US-invented but Japanese-perfected and manufactured-in-volume technology. John B. Goodenough who pioneered the early research on lithium-ion battery technology received his main funding support from the Department of Energy (DoE) and National Science Foundation (NSF) in the late 1980s (Henderson 2004; OSTI 2009). Major scientific breakthroughs accomplished at the University of Texas at Austin were quickly commercialized and launched in 1991 by the Japanese electronics giant Sony. (location 2272)

> In a 2005 working paper for the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Ralph J. Brodd (2005) identified issues with the advanced battery industry innovation model that were similar to the issues within the TFT-LCD industry. Another major scientific success faded away without greater value being captured in the form of US-based high-volume manufacture. Brodd’s study identifies the factors hindering the volume production of lithium-ion batteries in the US, but particularly placed emphasis on the short-termist approach of US corporations and venture capitalists. Brodd (2005, 22) argued that their short-termism was based upon achieving rapid financial returns (in comparison to their Japanese competitors’ focus on maximizing market share in the long run), which often discouraged them from any interest in building the domestic manufacturing capabilities while encouraging outsourcing of manufacture as an option. (location 2276)

> Figure 13. Origins of popular Apple products (location 2290)

> The ambivalent US approach is examined in detail in the third section, which shows how contradictory governmental initiatives prevent the full deployment of a clean technology sector, constraining investment and stalling broad deployment of new energy technologies. The US approach is important because it represents a paradigmatic case, where historic financial commitment by the public sector is challenged by ambiguous governmental initiatives: on the one hand, it is trying to ‘nudge’ the development of green technologies by stimulating venture capitalists (VC) to take a leading role; on the other hand, the US is also attempting to ‘push’ by funding coordinated public R&D and deployment initiatives. Meanwhile, current efforts to support manufacturing growth have transformed into a classic argument against ‘picking winners’ instead of an examination of how the State can more actively finance necessary supply chain development. The US has taken a ‘fund everything’ approach, hoping that a breakthrough disruptive energy innovation, that might also be ‘green’, will sooner or later emerge in labs, and that VCs will appear to finance the leading start-ups and make these innovative technologies commercially viable and eventually widely diffused. This has not been the case, because the development of many clean technologies requires long-term financial commitments of a kind that VCs are not willing or able to undertake. The fourth section concludes by analysing the different national approaches discussed in the second and third sections. (location 2449)

>
