# THE IDEOLOGICAL ORIGINS OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION by Bernard Bailyn

*Bernad Bailyn* is one of those amazing academics who is still cranking out books even though his first one came out in the *the early 1950's*. He graduated from Williams College in 1945 after serving in World War II. He immediately went to Harvard for graduate study where he still is, more than 60 years later.

Bailyn won the Pulitzer in History for this book. I remember picking it up in college (25 years ago!) back when I was a lefty who was programmed to believe the American revolution was an evil conspiracy among slave owning aristocrats. The book DID NOT COMPUTE -- so I put it back down.

I won't do better than [Wikipedia's explanation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Ideological_Origins_of_the_American_Revolution) of this important book, so here it is:

> The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution is a Pulitzer Prize-winning book of history by Bernard Bailyn. It is considered one of the most influential studies of the American Revolution published during the 20th century.

> The book grew out of Bailyn's introduction to the first volume of Pamphlets of the American Revolution, a series of documents of the Revolutionary era which he edited for the John Harvard Library. In the process of reading hundreds of pamphlets published between 1750 and 1776, Bailyn detected a pattern of similarities in argument, language, and invocation of certain figures including Cato the Younger and radical Whig heroes Algernon Sidney and John Wilkes. Bailyn analyzes the content of these popular pamphlets as clues to "the 'great hinterland' of belief" in the English North American colonies, "notions which men often saw little need to explain because they were so obvious." In lyrical prose that channels the radical Whig impulse, Bailyn explains the great hinterland of libertarianism for them.

> The book argued against the interpretation, identified with historian Charles A. Beard, that the Revolution had been primarily class warfare between competing social classes. Bailyn found that pamphlet writers sounded the same themes in their private writing as in public, and that their expressed fears of "slavery," "corruption," and a "conspiracy" against radical libertarianism were genuine.

This book teaches us about the idealogical inheritance of the revolutionary generation.  In Bailyn's words, from the preface:

> The pamphlets do reveal the influence of Enlightenment thought, and they do show the effective force of certain religious ideas, of the common law, and also of classical literature; but they reveal most significantly the close integration of these elements in a pattern of, to me at least, surprising design -- surprising because of the prominence in it of still another tradition, interwoven with, yet still distinct from, these more familiar strands of thought. This distinctive influence had been transmitted most directly to the colonists by a group of early eighteenth-century radical publicists and opposition politicians in England who carried forward into the eighteenth century and applied to the politics of the age of Walpole the peculiar strain of anti-authoritarianism bred in the upheaval of the English Civil War.
<<location 108>>

Opens the first chapter with a quote from Adams to prove the book:

> What do we mean by the Revolution? The war? That was no part of the Revolution; it was only an effect and consequence of it. The Revolution was in the minds of the people, and this was effected, from 1760 to 1775, in the course of fifteen years before a drop of blood was shed at Lexington. The records of thirteen legislatures, the pamphlets, newspapers in all the colonies, ought to be consulted during that period to ascertain the steps by which the public opinion was enlightened and informed concerning the authority of Parliament over the colonies. --John Adams to Jefferson, 1815
<<location 211>>

A great social change had taken place:

> The great social shocks that in the French and Russian Revolutions sent the foundations of thousands of individual lives crashing into ruins had taken place in America in the course of the previous century, slowly, silently, almost imperceptibly, not as a sudden avalanche but as myriads of individual changes and adjustments which had gradually transformed the order of society.

And a lot of this change was simply inevitable -- not merely because the New World offered a physical break with tradition, but because it allowed people who wanted to break to make it:

> By 1763 the great landmarks of European life -- the church and the idea of orthodoxy, the state and the idea of authority: much of the array of institutions and ideas that buttressed the society of the ancien regime--had faded in their exposure to the open, wilderness environment of America. But until the disturbances of the 1760’s these changes had not been seized upon as grounds for a reconsideration of society and politics. Often they had been condemned as deviations, as retrogressions back toward a more primitive condition of life. Then, after 1760 -- and especially in the decade after 1765--they were brought into open discussion as the colonists sought to apply advanced principles of society and politics to their own immediate problems.
<<location 437>>

> The original issue of the Anglo-American conflict was, of course, the question of the extent of Parliament’s jurisdiction in the colonies. But that could not be discussed in isolation. The debate involved eventually a wide range of social and political problems, and it ended by 1776 in what may be called the conceptualization of American life. By then Americans had come to think of themselves as in a special category, uniquely placed by history to capitalize on, to complete and fulfill, the promise of man’s existence.
<<location 445>>

i.e. the conflict that caused the Revolution also forced Americans to formally recognize and accept the changes that had been taking place for a century.

> “The liberties of mankind and the glory of human nature is in their keeping,” John Adams wrote in the year of the Stamp Act. “America was designed by Providence for the theatre on which man was to make his true figure, on which science, virtue, liberty, happiness, and glory were to exist in peace.”
<<location 451>>

I love how conscious they were of the importance of what they were doing.

> "In Europe, charters of liberty have been granted by power. America has set the example and France has followed it, of charters of power granted by liberty. This revolution in the practice of the world may, with an honest praise, be pronounced the most triumphant epoch of its history and the most consoling presage of its happiness." --James Madison, 1792
<<location 838>>

He opens second chapter with a quote from a will indicating the importance of books, and the books of the Radical Whigs:

> "I give to my son, when he shall arrive to the age of fifteen years, Algernon Sidney’s works,--John Locke’s works,--Lord Bacon’s works,--Gordon’s Tacitus,--and Cato’s Letters. May the spirit of liberty rest upon him!" --Last Will and Testament of Josiah Quincy, Jr., 1774
<<location 469>>

Both left and right in America obsess against a substance they call "power" -- as did the revolutionaries:

> The essence of what they meant by power was perhaps best revealed inadvertently by John Adams as he groped for words in drafting his Dissertation on the Canon and Feudal Law. Twice choosing and then rejecting the word “power,” he finally selected as the specification of the thought he had in mind “dominion,” and in this association of words the whole generation concurred. “Power” to them meant the dominion of some men over others, the human control of human life: ultimately force, compulsion. And it was, consequently, for them as it is for us “a richly connotative word”: some of its fascination may well have lain for them, as it has been said to lie for us, in its “sado-masochistic flavor,” for they dwelt on it endlessly, almost compulsively; it is referred to, discussed, dilated on at length and in similar terms by writers of all backgrounds and of all positions in the Anglo-American controversy.

> Most commonly the discussion of power centered on its essential characteristic of aggressiveness: its endlessly propulsive tendency to expand itself beyond legitimate boundaries. In expressing this central thought, which explained more of politics, past and present, to them than any other single consideration, the writers of the time outdid themselves in verbal ingenuity. All sorts of metaphors, similes, and analogies were used to express this view of power. The image most commonly used was that of the act of trespassing. Power, it was said over and over again, has “an encroaching nature”; “. . . if at first it meets with no control [it] creeps by degrees and quick subdues the whole.” Sometimes the image is of the human hand, “the hand of power,” reaching out to clutch and to seize: power is “grasping” and “tenacious” in its nature; “what it seizes it will retain.” Sometimes power “is like the ocean, not easily admitting limits to be fixed in it.” Sometimes it is “like a cancer, it eats faster and faster every hour.” Sometimes it is motion, desire, and appetite all at once, being “restless, aspiring, and insatiable.” Sometimes it is like “jaws . . . always opened to devour.” It is everywhere in public life, and everywhere it is threatening, pushing, and grasping; and too often in the end it destroys its benign--necessarily benign--victim.

> What gave transcendent importance to the aggressiveness of power was the fact that its natural prey, its necessary victim, was liberty, or law, or right. The public world these writers saw was divided into distinct, contrasting, and innately antagonistic spheres: the sphere of power and the sphere of liberty or right. The one was brutal, ceaselessly active, and heedless; the other was delicate, passive, and sensitive. The one must be resisted, the other defended, and the two must never be confused. “Right and power,” Richard Bland stated, “have very different meanings, and convey very different ideas”; “power abstracted from right cannot give a just title to dominion,” nor is it possible legitimately, or logically, to “build right upon power.” When the two are intermingled, when “brutal power” becomes “an irresistible argument of boundless right” as it did, John Dickinson explained, under the Cromwellian dictatorship, innocence and justice can only sigh and quietly submit.
<<location 847>>

What about slavery? The problem for slave owners was that all this revolutionary rhetoric against Britain's "enslavement" of the colonists kind of rubbed the wrong way against the institution of slavery:

> No one had set out to question the institution of chattel slavery, but by 1776 it had come under severe attack by writers following out the logic of Revolutionary thought. The connection, for those who chose to see it, was obvious. “Slavery” was a central concept in eighteenth-century political discourse. As the absolute political evil, it appears in every statement of political principle, in every discussion of constitutionalism or legal rights, in every exhortation to resistance. Can any power in this province, a Massachusetts polemicist asked in 1754, “make slaves of any part of the [British] nation?” Who would not choose “to dine upon a turnip, with old Fabricus, and be a freeman, rather than flow in luxury, and be a slave?” It was the loss of attachment to a free constitution that had plunged Rome from the summit of her glory “into the black gulf of infamy and slavery.” Tyrannical governments reduce people to “a kind of slaves to the ministers of state.” An ambitious ministry must be taught “that any attempt to enslave us would be as fruitless as it would be impolitic.” “Those who are taxed without their own consent expressed by themselves or their representatives,” John Dickinson wrote, with supporting quotations from Pitt and Camden, “are slaves. We are taxed without our consent expressed by ourselves or our representatives. We are therefore--SLAVES.” Yes, Josiah Quincy concluded in 1774, “I speak it with grief--I speak it with anguish--Britons are our oppressors: I speak it with shame--I speak it with indignation--we are slaves”...
<<location 3019>>

So much of the thinking of the revolutionary generation was about how to keep private interests from dominating all others through control of government. But they didn't think about the kind of petty interests that did come to dominate American governments almost immediately after the revolution.

> Factions, interests, pressure groups of course existed in eighteenth-century America as they do in the twentieth century. But these, to eighteenth-century minds, were the burdensome impedimenta, the unfortunate but more or less less inevitable details of public life which must be borne but need scarcely be dignified by a place in formal political thought; only occasionally were they included, except by way of denunciation, in political and constitutional theory.
<<location 3588>>

The interests they worried about were the traditional groupings of English social life:

> The categories within which the colonists thought about the social foundations of politics were inheritances from classical antiquity, reshaped by seventeenth-century English thought. The primary units of politics, they believed, were the three basic orders of society corresponding to the three basic forms of government: royalty, the nobility, and the commons. These formal strata were distinct in composition and interests. Royalty was unique in its sanctity and prerogative power; it stood for order and authority, and it symbolized and unified the state. The commons had the power of numbers and of productivity; it was unique in promoting liberty and individual expression. The nobility, centrally important to the constitution, had a stalwart independence guaranteed by inherited wealth and status which enabled it to mediate the powerful conflicts generated above and below; it acted as a balance wheel, preventing the commons, on the one hand, from turning society into a licentious mob, and the crown, on the other, from becoming tyrannical. Each was essential, and equally essential, in achieving the equilibrium in government that brings tranquility and happiness to all; but any of them, released from the counter-pressures of the others, would degenerate--into a tyranny, or into a self-aggrandizing oligarchy, or into an anarchic democracy destructive, in the end, to liberty as well as to property.
<<location 3591>>

The English "constitutional miracle" was the lucky pitting of social forces against each other in balance: the king, the commons and the nobles:

> This constitutional miracle the colonists felt they shared, for they too lived within the jurisdiction of the British government. But they lived also within their own immediate governments, and therein lay a problem that many had recognized from the earliest years but that became acute only after 1763 when the foundations of government in America came under intense scrutiny.
<<location 3603>>

A problem for U.S. political thought therefore was the absence of the nobles.

> The commons was obviously and vigorously present; and so too was the crown in the person of the King’s vicegerent, the governor; but the nobility was not.
<<location 3606>>


> Nowhere in eighteenth-century America had the legal attributes of nobility been recognized or perpetuated. The law made no provision for hereditary privileges; no office of government had been guaranteed by birth.
<<location 3610>>

So maybe we had to create a branch of government to fill that void?

> As the Anglo-American troubles multiplied and greater control over government was sought by officialdom on the one hand and popular leaders on the other, more and more thought was given to the means by which “an independent and honest middle branch of legislature” might be created capable of resisting both “the exuberances of popular liberty and . . . the stretches of the government party when . . . either advanced beyond the constitutional line of propriety.” Remedies were sought for this constitutional weakness, and proposals were made that reached into the roots of American society. A number of writers came to the conclusion that the only solution was the creation of a privileged social order from which the members of the Council could be chosen. Ideally, Governor Bernard wrote, a hereditary nobility should be created in the colonies. And though he acknowledged that America was not yet “(and probably will not be for many years to come) ripe enough for an hereditary nobility,” he saw no reason why “a nobility for life” could not be established at once. A life peerage “would probably give strength and stability to the American governments as effectually as an hereditary nobility does to that of Great Britain.” It was a logical idea, which others too came to believe was the solution to a crucial problem of government. In New York the scurrilous attacker of Alexander McDougall, the pseudo-Wilkes, attributed much of the current troubles to the fact that England’s “AUGUST PEERAGE . . . does not obtain, with its due weight, in the royal colonies.” Its pale imitation, the Council, is “equal in legislative and judicial authority; but in influence, privileges and stability, vastly inferior.” No one, surely, unless his principles were “verging to democracy”--(“God forbid that we should ever be so miserable as to sink into a republic!”)--would wish anything but strength for this “essential though imperfect branch of the mixed monarchy.” Let us hope that “with the increase of numbers and opulence” the colonies will achieve “a perfect copy of that bright original which is the envy and admiration of the world!” And the one thing, above all others, that would advance the progress toward that goal would be the vesting of the councilors “with their offices for life.”
<<location 3647>>

A less sarcastic attempt to grapple with it:

> A way must be found “to put a man of fortune above the common level and exempt him from being chosen by the people into the lower offices” where he might be subject to popular intimidation. The best solution, as he saw it, was to create “an order of patricians or esquires . . . to be all men of fortune or good landed estates” appointed to that rank for life by act of the governor and Council; from among this social order members of the Council would be chosen, and on them would be bestowed “a title one degree above that of esquire.”
<<location 3667>>

> John Adams believed that arguments in favor of creating an American life peerage were part of the general plot against liberty hatched in the corrupt centers of power in England and America.
<<location 3672>>

...but in old age he would say he expected -- and desired -- a new aristocracy to take over.

> William Drayton, who knew well enough that the colonies did “not yet desire dignities, lordships, and dukedoms,” believed that the main constitutional difficulty in the colonies lay in the appointment to Council seats of “more strangers from England than men of rank in the colony”
<<location 3674>>

Anyways this missing piece made some scared about what would happen after breaking away:

> The idea that constitutional liberty was bound up with the mediating political power of a privileged social order persisted into the turmoil of the Revolutionary crisis, but it came under new pressures and was challenged by the more advanced thinkers of the time. If America breaks free of English control, it was asked, what would become of the liberty-preserving balance? What elements would there be to be balanced? Monarchy as a social order would obviously be gone. The commons, on the other hand, would most certainly and substantially be there. And that great guarantor of liberty, the middle order?
<<location 3679>>

But most were willing to take the leap:

“An American House of Lords is in agitation,” he wrote, to be composed of hereditary “orders of the American nobility.” I am ravished and transported at the foresight of the American grandeur . . . Oh! how we shall shine with dukes in America! There will be no less than fifty-three of them . . . The Committees of Correspondence will furnish us with marquises; and the Committees of Observation, with earls. The viscounts may consist of heroes that are famed for their exploits in tarring and feathering; and the barons, or lowest order, of those whose merit has been signalized in burning such pamphlets as they were unable to answer.
<<location 3686>>

The size of the colonies was seen as a major issue:

> Republics had always been known to be delicate polities, peculiarly susceptible to inner convulsions and outer pressures. And the larger the state the greater the danger. Monarchy, it was generally agreed, was best suited to extensive domains, popular government to small territories. The great and glorious republics of the past--“the ancient republics--Rome, Carthage, Athens, etc.,” and more recently Switzerland and Holland--had all been small in size compared with the united colonies, compared even with most of the individual states. Republican government “may do well enough for a single city or small territory, but would be utterly improper for such a continent as this. America is too unwieldy for the feeble, dilatory administration of democracy.”
<<location 3697>>

And you have to remember that part of that was because it took so long to get around. It took *weeks* to get from Virginia to New York or Philly before the revolution.

Tensions between concepts of 'democracy' and 'republic':

> “Democracy”--this was the point. “Republic” and “democracy” were words closely associated in the colonists’ minds; often they were used synonymously; and they evoked a mixed response of enthusiasm and foreboding. For if “republic” conjured up for many the positive features of the Commonwealth era and marked the triumph of virtue and reason, “democracy”--a word that denoted the lowest order of society as well as the form of government in which the commons ruled--was generally associated with the threat of civil disorder and the early assumption of power by a dictator.
<<location 3703>>

> Andrew Eliot, who pointed out the “many inconveniencies which would attend frequent popular elections”; and lawyers like John Dickinson, who believed that “a people does not reform with moderation,” or like William Drayton, who stated forthrightly that he was as desirous of checking “the exuberances of popular liberty” as he was the excesses of prerogative.
<<location 3710>>

> The leaders of the Revolutionary movement were radicals -- but they were eighteenth-century radicals concerned, like the eighteenth-century English radicals, not with the need to recast the social order nor with the problems of economic inequality and the injustices of stratified societies but with the need to purify a corrupt constitution and fight off the apparent growth of prerogative power. To them it did not seem reasonable to “collect and assemble together the tailors and the cobblers and the ploughmen and the shepherds” of a vast domain and expect them to “treat and resolve about matters of the highest importance of state.” They would not know enough, they would not be skilled enough in government, they would not be sufficiently disinterested or independent of pressures to manage a government properly. Surely tradition and the lessons of history indicated that without an economically independent, educated, leisured order of society standing securely and permanently above the petty selfishness of multitudes of ordinary men scattered through half a continent, nothing would be expressed in government but “infinite diversity or particular interests [and] dissonant opinions”; and the result might well be chaos.
<<location 3714>>

> The discussion of these crucial questions--questions upon which the future character of public life in America would depend--began when the burning public issue was still the colonies’ relation to England and ended a decade or more later in the revisions of the first state constitutions. Between the two points was a continuous, unbroken line of intellectual development and political experience. It bridged two intellectual worlds: the mid-eighteenth-century world, still vitally concerned with a set of ideas derived ultimately from classical antiquity--from Aristotelian, Polybian, Machiavellian, and seventeenth-century English sources, and the quite different world of Madison and Tocqueville. Between the two was not so much a transition of ideas as a transformation of problems, the ultimate characteristics of which may be seen emerging indeliberately and unsurely in the passionate debate touched off by Paine’s Common Sense. For the intellectual core of that brilliant pamphlet advocating the independence of the colonies was its attack on the traditional conception of balance as a prerequisite for liberty. The assumption of the admirers of “the so much boasted constitution of England” that the balance of socio-constitutional forces was liberty-preserving, Paine proclaimed, was a fallacy. “The more simple anything is,” he argued, “the less liable it is to be disordered, and the easier repaired when disordered.” The constitution of England is “so exceedingly complex” that its evils can scarcely be diagnosed. What it consists of, really, is “the base remains of two ancient tyrannies”--“monarchical tyranny in the person of the King . . . [and] aristocratical tyranny in the persons of the peers”--thinly overlaid with “new republican materials in the persons of the commons, on whose virtue depends the freedom of England.” The famous notion “that the constitution of England is a union of three powers reciprocally checking each other is farcical,” and he proceeded to specify its emptiness and self-contradiction. What liberty there was in England was “wholly owing to the constitution of the people, and not to the constitution of the government.” In America, where the character of the people was ideal for the attainment of liberty, institutions should be devised that conformed not to inherited prejudices and the accidents of history but to the true principles of human liberty. Let the American colonies cast off the chains that tie them to England and its corrupt monarchy, and as independent states create unicameral assemblies chosen annually by a “more equal” system of representation than heretofore and presided over by “a president only.” And let “a CONTINENTAL CHARTER or charter of the United Colonies (answering to what is called the Magna Carta of England)” be framed to provide for a unicameral assembly for the nation as well, selected by the same electorate and also presided over by a president, chosen from the various states in rotation. “But where, says some, is the King of America? I’ll tell you, friend, he reigns above, and doth not make havoc of mankind like the Royal Brute of Great Britain.”
<<location 3725>>

Paine was a bit of a Leninist -- and Adams knew it:

> Common Sense had scarcely been published when it came under strong attack, not only by loyalists but by some of the most ardent patriots who feared the tendencies of Paine’s constitutional ideas as much as they approved his plea for Independence.
<<location 3752>>

> A more sophisticated Tory attack on Paine’s constitutional ideas, Charles Inglis’ True Interest of America, was less influential since the entire first printing of the pamphlet was destroyed by a Whig mob; by
<<location 3766>>

Here's a chunk on Adam's thinking:

> Paine’s most influential opponents, however, were not Tories but those who agreed with him on the question of independence but who disagreed with his constitutional proposals. John Adams, who distrusted him from the instant he laid eyes on him (or so he said in later years) and called him “a star of disaster” whose constitutional ideas flowed either from “honest ignorance or foolish superstition on one hand or from willful sophistry and knavish hypocrisy on the other,” denounced Paine’s advocacy of unicameral assemblies in both states and nation, and, fearing the effect “so popular a pamphlet might have among the people,” set about to put things right.

> What bothered Adams most about Common Sense was that its plan of government “was so democratical, without any restraint or even an attempt at any equilibrium or counterpoise, that it must produce confusion and every evil work.” The premise of his own plan, sketched in his Thoughts on Government, which circulated among the constitution-makers of several states in manuscript in the spring of 1776, was that it was possible to devise republican governments, by definition lacking the first and second orders of society, with inner balances as effective as those of a mixed monarchy. It was possible because a republic was, by proper definition, only “an empire of laws, and not of men,” and this permitted “an inexhaustible variety” of institutional forms “because the possible combinations of the powers of society are capable of innumerable variations.” In an extensive country, direct assembly of the whole population was out of the question, and so the first step was “to depute power from the many to a few of the most wise and good” who should form in their assembly “an exact portrait of the people at large . .  . equal interest among the people should have equal interest in it.” Yet however representative of the interests of society this single assembly might be, it should not be given control of all the branches of government, for it was the nature of popular assemblies to be fickle, “productive of hasty results and absurd judgments,” avaricious, and ambitious. Difficult for the electorate to control, an unchecked representative assembly would quickly make itself permanent, exempt itself from the burdens it laid on its constituents, and pass and execute laws for its own benefit. And in any case popular assemblies were unsuited to exercise certain of the powers of government: they were too open and inefficient to act as an executive, and too slow in procedure and ignorant of the law to act as a judiciary. The organization of government “ought to be more complex” than a single unicameral assembly. Even separating the executive from the legislative power and placing it in the hands of an organ of government other than the assembly would not be sufficient, for “these two powers will oppose and enervate upon each other until the contest shall end in war.” There would have to be also an additional assembly “as a mediator between these two extreme branches.” Chosen by the representative assembly, it “should have a free and independent exercise of its judgment, and consequently a negative voice in the legislature.” Let the two houses together choose annually an executive capable of exercising independent judgment to the extent of vetoing acts of the legislature.Distinct from all of this should be the judiciary, composed of men of learning, legal experience, and wisdom. “Their minds should not be distracted with jarring interests,” and they should be guaranteed independence by life tenures. Such a republican system, expressing but yet controlling and refining the will of the people, would create an “arcadia or elysium” compared with all other governments “whether monarchical or aristocratical.”
<<location 3796>>

Lots of different ideas were out there about how to replace the peers, and...was that where the independent judiciary came from? I think so, but might have that wrong.

> What precisely these counter-revolutionary anti-republicans had in mind, and the extent of their agreement with Adams on the key point of the anomalous middle chamber, was made clear in what Henry called a “silly thing” and Richard Henry Lee described as a “contemptible little tract,” Carter Braxton’s Address to the Convention of . .  . Virginia, written for the specific purpose of refuting Adams’ __Thoughts on Government.__

> Braxton’s “anti-republicanism,” it developed, was the result of his effort to recreate artificially the traditional socio-constitutional basis of governmental balance. The present tyranny of the British government, he wrote, is not as Paine had said, intrinsic to its structure but the result of “a monied interest” having usurped the power of the crown and destroyed “those barriers which the constitution had assigned to each branch” of the government. Let not the whole be condemned for the momentary corruption of a part. Let Virginia, in principle at least, “adopt and perfect that system which England has suffered to be so grossly abused and the experience of the ages has taught us to venerate.” Restore the independence of the branches lost in England. Let there be a popular assembly from which the blood-sucking adherents of the moneyed interests would be excluded and the system of representation made “equal and adequate” so that the prerogative would not be able to corrupt it. Let the house of representatives choose a governor to serve for life and a council of state to constitute “a distinct or intermediate branch of the legislature, and hold their places for life in order that they might possess all the weight, stability, and dignity due to the importance of their office” as well as the time and means for the reflective study of policies and laws. Only such an independent, superior “second branch of the legislature” would be able to “mediate and adjust” the differences that might arise between the governor and the house, “investigate the propriety of laws, and often propose such as may be of public utility.”
<<location 3820>>

> Others in Virginia, including some of those who were striving deliberately to establish a government “very much of the democratic kind,” agreed that a “second branch of legislation” was necessary, though they differed in the degree to which they conceived of this branch as a function of government rather than as an embodiment of a social order. Jefferson, whose draft constitution for his state was a far more “radical departure” than could possibly be accepted, not only provided for a “senate” but so devised the election of its members that they would be, once chosen, “perfectly independent of their electors”; and though he felt that his device--election of the senators by the representatives for a nonrenewable term of nine years--would provide the necessary independence, he said that he “could submit, though not so willingly, to an appointment [of senators] for life or to anything rather than a mere creation by and dependence on the people.” And the plan George Mason prepared for the state’s official drafting committee provided for the election of the upper house not by the people but by a separate group of specifically elected “deputies or sub-electors” whose sole function it would be to choose members of the upper house from among those possessing “an estate of inheritance of lands in Virginia of at least two thousand pounds value.”
<<location 3840>>

> There were almost as many variations in these constitutional programs attempting somehow to restrain the force of “the democracy” within a republican system as there were writers, for all proposals had to be extemporized from unevenly applicable models in circumstances imperfectly understood. Braxton was alarmed at the “democratical” tendencies of Adams’ thought, and Adams was horrified by the same drift in Paine’s. There were depths below depths, and at the very bottom of the descent from a mixed monarchy manqué to a total repudiation of complexity and balance in society and government was an ill-written pamphlet of thirteen pages published, probably in New England, without identification of author, printer, or place of publication.

> Dedicated “to the honest farmer and citizen,” The People the Best Governors developed, incompletely yet repetitiously, the theme stated in its title. “The people know best their own wants and necessities, and therefore are best able to rule themselves.”
<<location 3846>>

> Some in Pennsylvania, accepting forthrightly the radical implications of the revolutionary situation but still thinking in traditional terms, concluded that in the American situation “a well-regulated democracy,” of all forms of government, “is most equitable.” How could it be otherwise? The constitution of Pennsylvania could scarcely make provision for “a representative of a king, for we have none; nor can there be need of a council to represent the house of lords, for we have not, and hope never shall have, a hereditary nobility different from the body of the people.” To make “places of power” a prerogative of birth was poor policy indeed, for “wisdom is not a birthright”; nor was life tenure in office advisable since “men’s abilities and manners may change.” The fact that other governments have “something, a senate, a council, or upper house,” was no reason for Pennsylvania to have one too. “Free government can better, much better, subsist without it. Different branches of legislature cause much needless expense, two ways: first, as there are more persons to maintain; and second, as they waste time and prolong a session by their contentions.” If Rome had been a “true democracy, without a senate,” it would have lasted longer, and now if Americans were to “admit different branches of legislature” the result might well be just the sort of civic degeneration that has taken place in England. The direction thought should take in the present transactions in America (“the most important . . . in any nation for some centuries past”) was toward a “truly popular government” where rotation in office would be mandatory and continuous, and where officeholders would be held to strict accountability. Above all, let the organization of government be simple. At present we have no estate of hereditary privilege. If, nevertheless, we create an organ of government modeled on those that elsewhere have served the political interests of privileged orders, there will soon be some here who will learn how to maintain control of such an institution, and in time become used to thinking of it as somehow peculiarly their own. In the end, therefore, Pennsylvanians may discover that they have artificially created what fate had mercifully spared them.
<<location 3860>>

The future was with the radical popular representation argument:

> But the future lay with two other Pennsylvania writers, one of whom expressed clearly what was becoming a general agreement concerning the character of the second chamber in an American republic, an agreement which constitution writers would struggle to express adequately in institutions in the years that followed, and the other of whom pointed directly to what, evolving logically from the breakdown of traditional notions of the social basis of English constitutionalism, would become the fundamental conception of a new theory of politics.
<<location 3879>>

> The first writer, observing that the colony had “but one order of freemen in it,” argued historically, with evidence quoted wholesale from a book published five years earlier in England, that “the best model that human wisdom, improved by experience, has left them to copy” was “the old Saxon form of government” which had been transferred from “the German woods . . . into England about the year four hundred and fifty.” At that time England had been a society of “small republics” within which the entire population, “being all equally interested in every question,” had met often in council for full and equal discussion, and from which deputies had been sent to “a national Council and legislative authority.” Let Pennsylvania’s government be the same as this “beautiful system.” Let there be extreme decentralization of political power, frequent elections by secret ballot, open debates in assemblies, popularly elected and moderately paid judges and local officers, and militia armies with elected field commanders. As for the perplexing question of “the respective powers of the several branches of the legislature,” the most judicious arrangement would be to have, in addition to a representative assembly, a council composed of men distinguished by their “superior degree of acquaintance with the history, laws, and manners of mankind, and by that means they will be more likely to foresee the mischievous consequences that might follow a proceeding which at first view did not appear to have anything dangerous in it.” And it would also be a good idea to have, in addition, a “small privy council” to advise and assist the governor in the execution of his duties. The possibility that the members of the upper house would “inveterate themselves” could be eliminated by having them elected at short intervals, for that would give the ultimate decision to the people at large, who surely have not forgotten, nor will fail to guard against, “the mischiefs which have overspread the world, from the days of Sylla to the present bloody period, from the same tyrannic source.”64
<<location 3883>>

A new political theory was rising. And of course trying to place it in reference to tradition (Saxons!).

> The substitution of knowledge, wisdom, and judgment for hereditary privileges as the necessary qualifications for membership in the second chamber of the legislature was only the beginning of a solution to the problem, however, for there was as yet no sense of how these qualities could be recognized publicly, isolated, and recruited into a particular branch of government. Nor was it clear that such a solution avoided the perpetuation of a quasi-traditional aristocracy and hence was free of inconsistency with basic Revolutionary principles, for it was difficult to throw off the assumption that superiority was unitary, that “gentlemen of education, . .  . leisure, . .  . wisdom, learning, and a firmness and consistency of character” were also gentlemen of “fortune.” 65 But it was a solution of sorts that pressed against the boundaries of traditional ideas even if it did not penetrate much beyond them. The adumbration of a truly new configuration of ideas became visible at the same time, however, in another pamphlet dealing with the same problem, the remarkably original and cogent __Four Letters on Interesting Subjects.__
<<location 3899>>

The new view is taking shape:

> The entire discussion of the effects of divisions among and within the branches of government, the author declared, had been clouded by myths and misunderstandings. Arguments against the simplest forms of government are based on the idea that a number of houses check each other to the general advantage of all. But in fact the notion “has but little weight.” For, in the first place, such checking “tends to embarrass and prolong business”; in the second place, it may injure collective “honor and tempers, and thereby produce petulances and ill-will which a more simple form of government would have prevented”; and in the third place, “the more houses, the more parties”: different houses may serve only to institutionalize and sharpen conflicts of interests that otherwise might be reconciled. Suppose, the writer went on, “the landed interest would get into one house, and the commercial interest into the other.” The result would be that a, "perpetual and dangerous opposition would be kept up, and no business be got through. Whereas, were there a large, equal and annual representation in one house only, the different parties, by being thus blended together, would hear each others’ arguments; which advantage they cannot have if they sit in different houses. To say there ought to be two houses because there are two sorts of interest is the very reason why there ought to be but one, and that one to consist of every sort."

> Here quietly but profoundly the ground of political thought had shifted. The writer was not a “Sidney . .  . the ‘classical’ republican par excellence, with no feeling whatever for the shifting possibilities of political life,” and his essay was not, like the classical sources all eighteenth-century Americans venerated, “concerned with forms of government rather than with their institutions.” 67 The essential units participating in the constitution were no longer abstract categories, formal orders of society derived from the assumptions of classical antiquity; they were interests, which, organized for political action, became factions and parties. Their constitutional role was not to manipulate independently a separate institution of government but to join in conflict within a single institution and “blend” themselves together into a general consensus. “Balance” was still involved, but with the repudiation of monarchy and nobility and the confinement of society to “the democracy,” the notion of what the social powers were that must be balanced and controlled was changing. What were now seen, though still only vaguely, were the shifting, transitory competitive groupings into which men of the eighteenth century actually organized themselves in the search for wealth, prestige, and power. And the concern with balance in government was shifting from a concern with social orders to that of functioning branches of government.
<<location 3928>>

> This shift in ways of thinking about the social basis of politics was part of a more general turn toward realism in political and constitutional thought. By the time the debates on the first state constitutions had been concluded, the sense that public affairs were basically struggles among formal orders of society had begun to fade and with it the whole elaborate paradigm that lay at the heart of eighteenth-century political thought. To be sure, the ancient formulations that had been so deeply engraved on the eighteenth-century mind still continued to be used; Americans of 1776 still referred to the crown, the aristocracy, and the democracy as social categories basic to politics and observed that each had its own fundamental principle or spirit in government: for monarchy, fear; for aristocracy, honor; for democracy, virtue. And it was still found natural to assume that the ultimate goal of politics was a motionless equilibrium among these entities, and that public controversy deliberately undertaken was essentially malign or aberrant.
<<location 3933>>

They sound like Larry Lessig! All the little interests. And yet it still happened:

> A republican constitution, to be successful, must somehow cope with the fact that the larger the unit of government the greater the number of contending factions and the smaller the chance that a republican government could control them. How could they be mastered or confined? What would prevent them from tearing a government to pieces?
<<location 3940>>

> Americans of 1760 continued to assume, as had their predecessors for generations before, that a healthy society was a hierarchical society, in which it was natural for some to be rich and some poor, some honored and some obscure, some powerful and some weak. And it was believed that superiority was unitary, that the attributes of the favored--wealth, wisdom, power--had a natural affinity to each other, and hence that political leadership would naturally rest in the hands of the social leaders. Movement, of course, there would be: some would fall and some would rise; but manifest, external differences among men, reflecting the principle of hierarchical order, were necessary and proper, and would remain; they were intrinsic to the nature of things.

> Circumstances had pressed harshly against such assumptions. The wilderness environment from the beginning had threatened the maintenance of elaborate social distinctions; many of them in the passage of time had in fact been worn away. Puritanism, in addition, and the epidemic evangelicalism of the mid-eighteenth century, had created challenges to the traditional notions of social stratification by generating the conviction that the ultimate quality of men was to be found elsewhere than in their external condition, and that a cosmic achievement lay within each man’s grasp. And the peculiar configuration of colonial politics--a constant broil of petty factions struggling almost formlessly, with little discipline or control, for the benefits of public authority--had tended to erode the respect traditionally accorded the institutions and officers of the state.69 Yet nowhere, at any time in the colonial years, were the implications of these circumstances articulated or justified. The assumption remained that society, in its maturity if not in its confused infancy, would conform to the pattern of the past; that authority would continue to exist without challenge, and that those in superior positions would be responsible and wise, and those beneath them respectful and content. These premises and expectations were deeply lodged; they were not easily or quickly displaced. But the Revolution brought with it arguments and attitudes bred of arguments endlessly repeated, that undermined these premises of the ancien regime.
<<location 3978>>

> But what needed and received demonstration and defense was not the caution, but the injunction: the argument that when injuries touched on “fundamental rights” (and who could say when they did not?) then nothing less than “duty to God and religion, to themselves, to the community, and to unborn posterity require such to assert and defend their rights by all lawful, most prudent, and effectual means in their power.”
<<location 3989>>

> declaring that “we are accountable to none but Christ”--words that had struck at the heart of every establishment, civil and religious, since the fall of Rome--concluded with the apparent paradox that “liberty is the fundamental principle of our establishment.” In such declarations a political argument became became a moral imperative.
<<location 4018>>

> Were they any less susceptible than Parliament to the rule that when their authority is extended beyond “the bounds of the law of God and the free constitution . . . ‘their acts are, ipso facto, void, and cannot oblige any to obedience’”? There
<<location 4025>>

> Riches in a new country like America signified nothing more than the accident of prior settlement. The accumulation of wealth had been “unavoidable to the descendants of the early settlers” since the land, originally cheap, had appreciated naturally with the growth of settlement. Perhaps it is owing to this accidental manner of becoming rich that wealth does not obtain the same degree of influence here which it does in old countries. Rank, at present, in America is derived more from qualification than property; a sound moral character, amiable manners, and firmness in principle constitute the first class, and will continue to do so till the origin of families be forgotten, and the proud follies of the old world overrun the simplicity of the new. Therefore, under the new dispensation, “no reflection ought to be made on any man on account of birth, provided that his manners rises decently with his circumstances, and that he affects not to forget the level he came from.”73 The idea was, in its very nature, corrosive to the traditional authority of magistrates and of established institutions. And
<<location 4045>>
