# Inheriting the Revolution: The First Generation of Americans
by Joyce Apple

_(Last annotated on May 6, 2014)_

> left them freer to follow their "thousand points of light." (location 287)

> Formerly used to denote a horse-racing course, career acquired a new reference to a "person's ... progress through life."29  (location 311)

> The rejection of the Federalists reflected more than a change of political personnel; it undermined a whole set of assumptions about who should exercise authority. The defenders of Washington's administration had spoken freely about the need for the steadying hand of the "rich, the able, and the well-born" while Jeffersonians championed free association and limited government.) Federalists retained the British belief that the people were the vigilant watchdogs of public liberty who should vote, but otherwise leave governing to the elected officials. In criticizing this passive role for a democratic citizenry, the Jeffersonians took quite literally the notion of governors as the servants of the people, answerable to them at all times. Struggling to awaken voters to the stakes involved in this controversy, the opposing sides succeeded in politicizing a new generation of Americans-the first to come to maturity after the Constitution.  (location 382)

> "Mr. Page," they told him, "we employ you to preach Jesus Christ and him crucified, but you preach Thomas Jefferson and him justified."2 The inflamed political rhetoric of contested elections had spread all the way to the Congregational Church of Hebron, Vermont, whose members, Ball recalled, disapproved of the hubbub.  (location 391)

> Political passions had become so superheated in the 179os that men who had cooperated through the hazardous years of colonial resistance, revolution, war, and constitutional reform would cross the street rather than greet one another as colleagues.' Charges of blasphemy, heresy, and apostasy flew back and forth, indicating that the idea of an "issue"-a matter of policy upon which good men might honorably disagree-had not yet become part of their conceptual armature. If there were disputes, then only the moral failures of one's opponents could explain them. As an editorial in the Federalist Massachusetts Mercury put it, "Naturally there can but be two parties in a Country; the friends of order and its foes." Jefferson wrote a friend in a similar vein: "I hold it as immoral to pursue a middle line, as between parties of Honest men and Rogues, into which every country is divided."4  (location 393)

> Like the proverbial new broom, Jefferson swept out of the civil service all those with pronounced Federalist sympathies, including army officers down to the rank of captain.15 Nothing could have expunged elite influence more thoroughly than this abrupt ending to the apprenticeship in power for the scions of Federalist families. Replacing them proved tricky. (location 438)

> Pressed to fill the openings in his department, Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin actually suggested that they might name women to the vacant posts, a notion that prompted Jefferson's brusque reply, "The appointment of a woman to office is an innovation for which the public is not prepared, nor am I." A decade later, Madison confronted a similar dearth of "officers and gentlemen" to lead an expanded army mobilized for the War of 1812.16  (location 441)

> Samuel Goodrich, who grew up in the bosom of a prominent Connecticut family, the Federalists were finally overthrown because "the great body of the people had got possession of suffrage, and insisted, with increasing vehemence, upon the removal of every impediment to its universality." Democracy became "the watchword of popular liberty," Goodrich concluded, permitting "the radical or republican party" to attract "the great body of the European immigrants-little instructed in our history or insti- tutions."22 Democratic assertiveness, ignorance of traditional wisdom, newcomers to politics-these became the crude instruments that shattered the circle of virtue envisioned by Dwight.  (location 456)

> Conservatives like Dwight worried about an unpoliced public sphere, especially at a time when clergymen were forced to compete as community leaders with lawyers and politicians. The discretion that had marked behavior in colonial society along with the upper class preference for conducting conversations within a small circle of leaders collapsed before an onslaught of publicity. (location 496)

> The frothy political discourses, the marketing of printed material, and the enlarged circle of readers worked together to make publicity the shaping force in the public realm. The previous constraint on the range of discussible topics had served the ruling families. Now, not even the powerful Southern planters could prevent a free black like David Walker from publishing scathing attacks on their way of life. Northern anti-slavery writers intruded boldly into the once-private sphere of the patriarchal household.  (location 500)

> With the widespread publicizing of conflicts came new tensions between "those in charge" and those who now felt empowered to inspect their officeholders' every move. What Francis had called "an enlarged democracy" in fact embraced many young men and women, white and black, who had been chafing under the restraint of their elders. Members of dissenting religious groups, free thinkers, and the newly prosperous all became participants in the disclosures and disputes that fleet-footed publicity carried to slave quarters, parlors, pioneer cabins, and urban tenements.  (location 503)

> adversaries encouraged immorality among the cadets by "openly extolling the writings of that prince of modern infidels, Voltaire."36 (location 523)

> Tennessee legislators discovered that lawyers fought almost 9o percent of all duels, so they required a disavowal of dueling for admission to the bar. Most states had laws disqualifying duelers from holding political office, but dueling remained a feature of American political life, North and South, through the r83os.68  (location 608)

> New York courts interpreted the hiring out of a slave as a fraudulent evasion of the abolition law, a decision that enabled Austin Steward to gain his freedom in 1815 at twenty-two, instead of in 1827, the date for the complete abolition of slavery in the state.80 Isabella Van Wagenen, who became famous as the passionate antislavery speaker Sojourner Truth, successfully called on a New York grand jury to get her five-year-old son returned from Alabama after he had been sold by their former owner.81 In Connecticut a 1788 act freed enslaved persons born after 1792 and others when they reached the age of twenty-five. Closing his memoir with his liberation in 1815, James Mars exuded confidence that "the time is not far distant when the colored man will have his rights in Connecticut."82 The doors that eventually closed on African-American hopes for full citizenship in the United States had not yet swung shut.  (location 645)

> Nationally the free black population in the United States tripled while that of enslaved persons doubled. The free African-American population in fact grew faster than any other group, from under io,ooo at the time of the Revolution to 197,ooo by i8io. Baltimore alone registered an increase from 300 to 5,600.83 Massachusetts reported no slaves in the first census of i79o; it shared with New Hampshire and Vermont the honor of being the only states in the antebellum period with "color-blind" constitutions.84 New York gave propertied blacks the vote, but most states-even those carved out of the Northwest Territory where slavery had always been forbidden-denied suffrage to African Americans. Congress passed a number of measures hostile to blacks: candidates for naturalization had to be white, militia enrollment was restricted to white male citizens; and African Americans could not carry the U.S. mails. Nothing if not inconsistent, Congress left enlistment in the Army and Navy open to blacks, though barring their entrance into the Marine Corps.85  (location 650)

> When African slaves in the French colony of Saint Domingue revolted in 1791, slaveholders confronted a new threat: the possibility of domestic insurrections. Indeed, when success crowned the Haitian revolution, Southerners tried to halt the spread of the news.89 Confronted with a black independence movement, Jefferson recoiled and denied Toussaint-Louver- ture the recognition that he had been accorded by his predecessor, John Adams. Free blacks, blamed for fomenting discontent among those enslaved, became the targets of aggressive legislation. The North Carolina General Assembly called for the suppression of any gathering of free Negroes and passed a law forcing all of them to "wear a badge of cloth" designating their free status.90 Playing cards with a slave could earn a free black up to "thirty-nine lashes on his bare back" under the North Carolina code that also called for auctioning off those free blacks who could not pay their fines.91 Virginia required any Negro who had become free after i8o6 to leave the state within twelve months. In the ensuing years, the states kept adding to the burden of being black.  (location 670)

> it, "the false clamors in circulation by the typographical gentry." (location 696)

> Those Northerners who were inclined to see slavery as an unmitigated evil gave vent to their indignation in the popular press. Subtly, the activities of reading and publishing became linked in the minds of slaveholders with noxious, antislavery agitation. And most portentously, Southerners began to see in every political initiative coming out of the North a prelude to a full-scale attack on slavery. The range of tolerated public expression diverged strikingly across the land. The North supported a flourishing publishing industry and a robust civic scene while, after a flurry of democratic initiatives in the South, the planter elite succeeded in confining important political discussions to the privacy of their gatherings. The more Northerners began talking about the nation and identifying their opinions as those of the nation, the more Southerners saw themselves standing outside the web of sentiments being spun up North, making all the more ironic the leadership that Virginia exerted through the Revolutionary era.  (location 754)

> If the Constitution provided the foundation of America's liberal society, the free enterprise economy raised its scaffolding. After Independence a new economic order took shape, the old one all but disappearing after the break with Great Britain. Without imperial control over land and credit thousands of bootstrap operators could act on their plans with little but high hopes for their financing. Jefferson's commitment to decentralizing governmental power dispersed opportunity to rural areas-areas where the water power of brooks and streams was cheap and plentiful. The gradual emancipation of slaves in the Northern states redirected capital from long-term investments in labor. International trade throve because of the favored role of the United States as a neutral carrier for France and England, again at war.  (location 786)

> The tenth of ten children, John Ball determined to leave home when he was a teenager, though accepting without challenge his father's claim to his labor until he was twenty-one. He struggled to gain more schooling over the objections of his father, whose own education had been limited to reading, writing, and ciphering. Finally Ball got to study with a nearby clergyman, who made the crucial decision to teach this frontier lad Latin, an intellectual attainment that opened the doors of Dartmouth to him. (location 818)

Note: great long story about this guy and his family as example of entrepreneurial lives and how small America still was. dropping in on Jackson without intro!

>
