Inventing the People: The Rise of Popular Sovereignty in England and America by Edmund S. Morgan

> we often take pains to prevent their collapse by moving the facts to fit the fiction, by making our world conform more closely to what we want it to be. We sometimes call it, quite appropriately, reform or reformation, when the fiction takes command and reshapes reality. [69](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=69)

> Although fictions enable the few to govern the many, it is not only the many who are constrained by them. In the strange commingling of political make-believe and reality the governing few no less than the governed many may find themselves limited—we may even say reformed—by the fictions on which their authority depends. Not only authority but liberty too may depend on fictions. Indeed liberty may depend, however deviously, on the very fictions that support authority. That, at least, has been the case in the Anglo-American world; and modern liberty, for better or for worse, was born, or perhaps we should say invented, in that world and continues to be nourished there. [71](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=71)

> “though I know we can propound nothing to his Majesty but that which he already knows, yet it is good sometimes to shew a man’s own thought to himself.”6 Even when Charles I dissolved Parliament in 1629 (not to call another until 1640) because the Commons were insisting on rights that he did not recognize, they responded that they “professed in all things to obey him as the highest under God.”7 [137](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=137)

divine right quotes 

>otherwise. The contests between king and Commons in the first three decades of the seventeenth century were formerly the centerpiece in historical accounts of that period. More recent investigations have shown that the contests were not quite what they seemed to be. Many of them were reflections of divisions in the king’s own court or within the ranks of local oligarchies, not expressions of opposition to the king. The leaders in the Commons’ disputes, it turns out, were often clients of noble lords. And the House of Commons as an institutional force in government with a mind and will of its own now appears considerably diminished. We have been shown that it did not use the power of the purse effectively. We have been shown that its winning of the initiative in legislation meant little because during these decades no significant legislation passed.8 [148](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=148)

new view: commons really didn't have much power after all 

>James I, who made the most extravagant claims to divinity, was about as ungodlike a man as anyone could hope to find; and his son Charles I, who succeeded to the throne in 1625 and who created a fine facade of majesty, turned out to be a habitual liar. He eventually got himself beheaded because he simply could not be trusted to keep any agreement he made. There is no need to belabor either the human depravity of these two or their extravagant pretensions to authority. That the fiction of divine right should have reached a high point in the reigns of two such improbable monarchs is perhaps a measure of the need that Englishmen felt for it in a world under the shadow of the Counter-Reformation. [172](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=172)

james 1 the high point of divine right? 

>But if neither James nor Charles looked or acted much like a god, neither did the Commons look or act much like mere subjects, despite their ritual repetition of the claim to be no more than that. They were in fact the top echelon of an order of men who ranked just short of the peerage, namely the gentry, whom the Tudor kings and queens of the sixteenth century had used to give the monarchy power and authority throughout the country. Many of those who sat in the Commons were younger sons or relatives of peers or elder sons who had not yet succeeded to the title. We need not consider whether the gentry in general were rising or falling economically, a matter about which historians disagree. What seems indisputable is that they were rising or had risen politically. The growth of royal power in England at the local level had come in large part by extending the numbers and functions of royally appointed justices of the peace in every county at the expense of local institutions. The royal appointees were all gentlemen, often the same gentlemen who sat in the House of Commons. At Westminster they might proclaim their subjection to the best of kings; at home they proclaimed the subjection of everyone else and wielded the king’s authority as their own. [177](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=177)

commons rising or risen. in partnership with kings 

>During the preceding two centuries, with the assistance (often at the behest) of their noble connections, the gentry had pretty much taken over the House of Commons, nudging out local burghers from the borough seats. England’s monarchs had smiled on the process, expanding the number of seats in the Commons, just as they expanded the number of justices in every county, so as to enlist the support of the gentry for drastic reforms in the religious and political organization of the whole nation. But political support can never be bought for nothing. The men exalted as justices in the king’s county courts looked still less like mere subjects when summoned to Westminster to assist in making the laws they enforced. While [189](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=189)

gentry nudging g out bourgers 

>The Commons were representatives, or as they more often expressed it “representors.” They claimed indeed to represent all other subjects. The full implications of that claim must be reserved for succeeding chapters. Here it must suffice to notice the restraints that representation imposed on the Commons. [199](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=199)

representors 

>Early in his reign King James had urged the Commons to make laws that hunting “be used by none but gentlemen, and that in a gentlemen-like fashion. For it is not fit that clowns should have these sports.”10 [206](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=206)

no hunting for clowns 

>But when it came to freedom from arrest, when it came to security of property, when it came to trial by jury, the Commons did not think these too good for clowns. They were doubtless more worried about protecting their own property then they were about that of lesser men, but when they spoke of the rights of subjects, they did not say, nor did they mean, the rights of gentlemen or even the rights merely of property-holders. As representatives of subjects, they made the most of their position, recognizing perhaps that there was a certain majesty in humanity itself that could be placed in the scales against the divinity of the king. [208](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=208)

freedom from arrest and trial by jury 

>When they confronted King John at Runnymede, we have been told, the barons were actually claiming rights only for barons, but that is not what they said. In their Magna Carta they made the king, already in the process of deification, promise that he would not do various unpleasant things to any free man. Similarly the seventeenth-century Commons, in their remonstrances and protestations and petitions, and particularly the Petition of Right of 1628, affirmed the rights of all the king’s subjects, not to be taxed or confined without “common consent by act of parliament” and “due process of law.”11 To have limited their claim would have been to weaken it: the king was God’s lieutenant, and God was said to be no respecter of persons. The Bible, which the members were fond of quoting, did not have much to say about the rights of gentlemen. [214](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=214)

the claim on behalf of humanity cane from bible 

>“The heart-blood of the Commonwealth,” said Sir John Eliot, “receiveth life from the privilege of this House.”12 “The freedom of this House,” said Sir Edward Coke, “is the freedom of the whole land.”13 To have said less would have been to reduce their eloquence to impertinence. [224](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=224)

> The Commons not only phrased the Petition of Right in absolute terms and fought off every move to soften those terms, but they obliged the king to accept it in a manner that eventually put it on the statute books, along with Magna Carta, where all men could lay claim to its benefits.14 [231](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=231)

petition of right 

>What is more remarkable is that they were able to turn the subjection of subjects and the exaltation of the king into a means of limiting his authority. [235](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=235)

> Thomas Egerton, who was to become the king’s lord chancellor and who was already a champion of the royal prerogative, explained in 1604 that the king could be present in his law courts through his judges, because the judges as well as those they judged had the laws to inform them of the king’s “known will.” What the king could not transfer was his “participation with God,” which endowed him with an absolute power “onelie proper to himselfe, and his place and person.” It was impossible for him to “infuse” into others “the wisdome, power, and guifts which God in respect of his place and Charge hath enabled him withall.”15 It was this superhuman, nonnegotiable, inalienable wisdom and power that the Commons, taking the king at his word, attributed to him and denied to anyone who claimed to be acting in his name. [241](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=241)

> “If my reason fail not,” he said, in the first speech after the disclosure of the Cornwall affair, “we ought to be sensible of this injury that any subject should presume to arrogate to himself his Majesty’s judgment.”17 [262](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=262)

> “That that moves me is that they have entered into the King’s breast as [if] to say: His Majesty will be justly provoked, and suppose that we countenance you [Eliot and Coryton] against him. Thus they climb up to the King’s heart.”18 No subject should be allowed to climb so high as to speak or act for the king. They must be made to climb down and eat humble pie, and they must do it in Cornwall, so that ordinary subjects there might witness their humiliation. [266](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=266)

> said it would destroy Parliament if they failed to proceed against Montagu simply because the king had told them not to.21 The Commons continued to press charges against him in succeeding sessions and petitioned the king to punish him and have his book burned. The king had the book burned but punished Montagu by making him bishop of Chichester.22 [282](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=282)

> shows their determination to keep the king from sharing any aspect of his divinity with a subject. [285](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=285)

no sharing divinity with subject. parliament stayed strong on that 

>“Whether a Crime committed by a subject as it is his act, yet whether he procuring the Kings command [301](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=301)

> It was simply not to be admitted that they had the king’s command for what they did or said. As the Speaker struggled in the chair, Sir John Eliot made the formal obeisance that dissociated the king from such capital enemies. “Wee have professed in all things,” he said, “to obey him as the highest under God. . . . Nothing hath bene done amongst us, but that which is agreeable to his Majesties justice; and as he is just, so we doubt not but he doth justly intend to performe, what we shall desire of him.”29 [307](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=307)

> The Commons at first approached the problem obliquely, by going after the favorites of favorites. In 1621 they tackled Sir Giles Mompesson, a hanger-on of the Marquis (later Duke) of Buckingham, James I’s chief favorite. [346](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=346)

> With this success behind them, the Commons went after bigger fish, and the court of James I was so riddled with corruption that bigger fish were plentiful. [351](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=351)

> Five years later, after Charles I succeeded to the throne and entrusted the Duke of Buckingham with a long string of offices and powers that offended the Commons and in fact endangered the kingdom, the Commons were ready to take on this Lord High Everything himself. Having [357](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=357)

> This time, impeachment having failed, they prepared a remonstrance, informing the king of all that was amiss in his kingdom, things “either unknown to you, or else by some of your Majesty’s ministers offered under such specious pretences as may hide their own bad intentions.” The list was a long one—innovations in religion, innovations in government, incompetence in the army and navy—and at the end it came to the point: the source of all these troubles was the Duke of Buckingham.39 In the debates that preceded the document Coke had set the tone by charging that “the Duke of Buckingham is the cause of all our miseries, and till the King be informed thereof we shall never go out with honor, nor sit with honor here. That man is the grievance of grievances.”40 Other members took up the cry, charging that “He is too great for a subject,” that he acted “as if he were the King’s own son.” “No power under the King,” said Selden, “ought to be so great as the power that this man has.”41 The Commons accordingly resolved, even before the remonstrance was drafted, that “the excessive power of the Duke of Buckingham and the abuse of that power are the chief cause of these evils and dangers to the King and kingdom.”42 When the king received the remonstrance, hard after the Petition of Right, he made no attempt to conceal his irritation. A week later he prorogued Parliament; and before the Commons met again an assassin robbed them of their prey. [361](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=361)

> And again the charges were the same. Strafford had “ascended the Throne,” had “assumed to himself Regall power,” had tried to “make himself equal to Sovereignty.”43 Laud was even worse: “he went about to sett himself above the King, and to make his throne his footstole.”44 The bishops who followed him had played the monarch, had “laid their hands upon the crowne.”45 The judges of the King’s Bench were guilty of “great Ambition.”46 Because all these men had elevated themselves above the level of subjects, they were all guilty of high treason. [387](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=387)

still keeping divine power nondelegatable. pretty much just obstructing kings power 

>All the king’s officers, they said, were “tied to give the King faithfull counsell. And if for want of that he command them to doe anie thing against law, their guilt and punishment is not lessened but aggravated by his command.”47 To obtain the king’s approval for an illegal act was to seek to lay the blame for it on God’s lieutenant, to hide the wickedness of an overmighty subject behind the shield of the king’s divinity. [395](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=395)

> in 1629, the charade could no longer be sustained. The fictions of divine right and the subjection of subjects had been strained too far, not only by the king but by the Commons themselves. In their earlier efforts to cut other subjects down to size the Commons had already begun to elevate themselves to an unsubject-like height. In their very insistence that the king’s authority was inalienable and not to be shared, they had been discovering a way to share it [399](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=399)

> They were, in fact, already in 1628 on the path that led a century and a half later to ministerial responsibility to Parliament. Phelips had then told them that “The use of parliaments is as well to give our counsels as our monies. . . . Never were we more glorious than when the King weighs not so much the counsel of them about him as the counsel of the parliament.”48 And Selden had wanted to include in the Petition of Right a clause asking “that all his [the king’s] ministers should serve him as they will answer the contrary to the high court of parliament.”49 Having climbed to the king’s heart, the Commons were eyeing his throne. [402](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=402)

how parliament got ministerial power 

>Lord Digby, who was later to vote against the attainder of Strafford and to withdraw to the king’s side, was one of the strongest supporters of the Triennial Act; and he gave as his reason that it would be no good “to punish and dispel ill Ministers. . . if there be not a way setled to Preserve and keep them good. . . .”50 To prevent the king from ruling without Parliament was one way to keep ministers good. But the apparatus of impeachment, by which Parliament was doing it, was clumsy. The Scottish Estates showed a better way when they were able, in September 1641, to gain the king’s agreement to choose his Scottish counsellors only with the “advice and approbation” of the Estates there. [417](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=417)

ministerial power of parliament started in scotland 

>A month later the English Parliament fell to discussing the same idea, the boldest maintaining that “all wee had done this Parliament was nothing unless wee had a negative voice in the placing of the great Officers of the King and of his Councellors, by whom his Majestie was ledd captive.”51 [422](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=422)

> members achieved sufficient agreement to close their Grand Remonstrance of December 1 with a demand for parliamentary approval of counsellors.52 Although the Grand Remonstrance did not produce at once the ministerial responsibility it demanded, it did signal an end to the politics of divine right, as Sir Edward Dering observed in opposing it: “When I first heard of a Remonstrance . . . I thought to represent unto the King the wicked Counsels of pernicious Counsellors . . . I did not dream that we shou’d remonstrate downward, tell stories to the People, and talk of the King as of a third Person.”53 But [425](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=425)

> And that kind of contest could not be conducted under the old ground rules. Ultimately it required a transfer of divine sanction from the king to his people and their representatives. [432](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=432)

> The divine right of kings had never been more than a fiction, and as used by the Commons it led toward the fiction that replaced it, the sovereignty of the people. Although the two may seem to lie at opposite poles, they were more closely linked than at first it would seem. By accepting the king’s divine right, by insisting that his authority was pure and indivisible, the Commons had come a good way toward making that authority unworkable except on the terms they dictated. By elevating the king they prepared his destruction; and by humbling mighty subjects they made way for the rise of the humble, made way, indeed, for the new fictions of a world where all men are created equal and governments derive their powers from those they govern. That was surely not the intention of the men who sat at Westminster and sang the praises of a perfect king, but they were not the first persons on whom history has played Whiggish tricks. [434](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=434)

> He did not represent anyone who had not specifically and individually empowered him; and a man could even change his mind, revoke the assignment of his vote, and attend in person. Thus we find in the records on the second day of the meeting: “Came John Langford of the He of Kent gentleman . . . who had given a voice in the choice of Robert Philpott, gentlemen, to be one of the Burgesses for the freemen of that Hand; and desired to revoke his voice and to be personally present in the Assembly; and was admitted.” One could also transfer one’s proxy, as it was called, from one man to another after the session began. Thus “Richard Lusthead desired to revoke his proxie [given to Richard Gannett] and was admitted and made Robert Clark his proxie.” The records imply that elections of representatives were held in particular neighborhoods, but those who voted against the winner were not bound to recognize him as their representative. Thus Cuthbert Fenwick came to the assembly and “claimed a voice as not assenting to the election of St. Mary’s burgesses and was admitted.” [570](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=570)

in first assemblies only representing those who chose you 

>The result was a politically bizarre situation: within the assembly some men had only their own vote, while others had the votes of all their proxies in addition to their own. On one occasion an aspiring politician named Giles Brent had enough proxies (seventy-three) to constitute a majority of the assembly all by himself. In the 1640s the assembly was gradually reduced to a strictly representative body, with each community in the colony choosing, by majority rule, a representative who would stand for the whole community, including the minority of free men who had voted against him. And he would cast a single vote in the assembly, regardless of the size of the community he represented.4 The original development [578](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=578)

> If representatives had in truth been, or had remained, mere subjects, if they had been merely the agents of their constituents, empowered only to consent for other subjects to measures propounded by the authority of a government of which they were not strictly speaking a part, then the fiction of representation would have been a much simpler and more plausible matter than it has ever in fact been. It is possible that in England the House of Commons continued for some time after its inauguration to be considered in the way that its members so often pretended to consider it, as a gathering of mere subjects, representing various communities of subjects throughout the land. As late as 1677 a member of the House of Commons could argue that “We do not take ourselves to be part of the government, for then the government is no monarchy.”15 The meaning was still familiar enough so that no one felt called upon to deny the statement. But by this time it was a little archaic, for the members of Parliament had long since ceased to behave like mere subjects. They were not content to give or withhold consent to measures presented to them by the king and his council. Instead, from early on, they had concocted measures of their own, presenting them as petitions to the king, but nevertheless in effect making governmental policy, making laws.16 Similarly in the colonies [664](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=664)

par say I g not part of the gov 

>In Virginia the authority to make laws lay in the Virginia Company, resident in London, but the Company called a representative assembly in the colony in 1619, and that assembly presented the Company with a series of laws which, with the Company’s approval, became the first laws enacted by [680](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=680)

first laws in america 

>But Sir Thomas Smith was able to state as a truism in 1583 that “everie Englishman is entended to bee there [in Parliament] present. . . . And the consent of the Parliament is taken to be everie mans consent.”22 [707](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=707)

> Sir Edward Coke, who was good at this kind of logic, may have been the first to state the idea in so many words. “Though one be chosen for one particular county, or borough,” he said, “yet when he is returned and sits in parliament, he serveth for the whole realm, for the end of his coming thither, as in the writ of his election appeareth, is generall.”23 From the fiction that one man may stand in the place of a whole community and bind that community by his actions, Coke has extrapolated the more extended fiction that one man may stand for the entire people of a country, most of whom have had no [711](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=711)

> Sidney here takes pains to distinguish the representative’s obligations to the whole nation from his obligations to the electors who choose him as their agent. Yet he relies on the electors to remove him if he betrays his trust. What trust? The trust reposed in him by Kent or Sussex, by Lewis or Maidstone? No, the trust reposed in him by the whole body of the nation, which cannot be assembled for removing him—and by the same token was never assembled for entrusting him in the first place. If he betrays the trust so mysteriously placed in him, he is supposed to be subject to scorn, infamy, and hatred. But whose scorn, infamy, and hatred? Is it not likely that the man who wins scorn, infamy, and hatred from the rest of the nation may win praise, fame, and love in Kent or Sussex, in Lewis or Maidstone? And conversely the man who is faithful to his trust for the nation may win scorn, infamy, and hatred in Kent or Sussex, Lewis or Maidstone. [756](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=756)

> Before representatives took over full command of government there was accordingly little agitation by excluded communities for inclusion in the representative body. The great expansion of representation in Parliament in the sixteenth century came, as we have seen, not because of demands by formerly excluded communities but because the rising and expanding gentry wanted seats in the House of Commons and because the king wanted them there. In the colonies, where the king’s authority was diluted by distance and representatives were correspondingly more powerful (in fact if not in theory), there was somewhat more concern about extending representation equitably. But even here, in Pennsylvania and in the southern colonies, where representation was most inequitable, there seems to have been little concern about the matter until shortly before the American Revolution. [785](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=785)

> The king had claimed his authority from God, and God was known to rule the universe by laws, laws which had been drawn out into positive enactments that defined right and wrong and which it was the king’s duty to observe and enforce. The king could do no wrong. And if his government, misled by evil counsellors, did wrong, his High Court of Parliament could call it to account. But who could call Parliament to account when Parliament did wrong and there was no king? Was Parliament bound by its own laws? If Parliament made the laws, could Parliament not unmake them? Quis custodiet ipsos custodes? Was there any way that the people themselves, the whole people, the fictional people, could materialize and act apart from their representatives in order to [805](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=805)

> These questions have troubled the advocates of popular sovereignty from its inception to the present day. New answers, new devices to bring the facts toward the fiction are invented from time to time. America’s answers have been somewhat different from England’s. But the paths taken in both England and America were first laid out in seventeenth-century England when Parliament challenged the king and replaced divine right with the sovereignty of the people. If we would understand how our own fictions came into existence and continue to operate, we must return to the stormy years when English men and women first tried them out. [811](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=811)

> before those in the remaining “Rump” could bring themselves to consider doing away with a monarch and monarchy. Long before then, however, they were prepared to go beyond remonstrances and petitions. [880](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=880)

> February 1642, in the famous militia ordinance (so called because, though passed by both houses of Parliament, it did not receive the king’s consent and so could not be called a law) they withdrew command of the country’s militia from the king and took it upon themselves. [881](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=881)

> Even then Parliament kept on pretending that the king as king was on their side, his regal and legal body remaining with them at Westminster while his misled person marched an army against theirs. [885](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=885)

> But while Parliament and its adherents continued the old pretense, the fictions that centered in the divine right of kings were not adequate to support the challenge that Parliament was now mounting to the king’s authority. A new ideology, a new rationale, a new set of fictions was necessary to justify a government in which the authority of kings stood below that of the people or their representatives. [886](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=886)

> The sovereignty of the people was not a repudiation of the sovereignty of God. God remained the ultimate source of all governmental authority, but attention now centered on the immediate source, the people. Though God authorized government, He did it through the people, and in doing so He set them above their governors. The idea was not wholly novel. It was at least as old as the Greeks, and in the preceding century it had served to justify appeals for rebellion by Protestants against Catholic kings and by Catholics against Protestant kings. These “monarchomachs” had fastened upon the people a duty to monitor their government’s compliance with the will of God and to oust or slay any monarch who failed the test of orthodoxy, Catholic or Protestant as the case might be.2 The new popular sovereignty as expounded by the adherents of Parliament in the 1640s owed much to the monarchomachs, as it also owed something to the doctrine of divine right that it replaced; but the change of emphasis was crucial: duty toward God gave way to the rights of men. [889](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=889)

was still from God. and was not really new 

>them.4 Even the biblical text most commonly used to discourage popular resistance to government (Romans XIII, “Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers”) could be interpreted to justify it simply by affirming the people to be higher than their government: “Though it be not lawful for inferiours to resist superiours . . . . Yet is it very commendable for the superiour to resist the inferiour. Therefore it is undoubtedly lawful for the people, or their Representative, to resist the King . . . . The people’s power is the higher, yea the supream power.”5 Although such a direct reversal of common parlance was unusual, revolutions in thought frequently take the form of shifts in emphasis, with old ideas not repudiated, but put to new uses. The [904](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=904)

> Although the descent of England’s kings from William the Conqueror invited such an attribution, English publicists had often preferred to base William’s title to the throne (and that of his successors) on some ground other than his subjugation of their countrymen. To that end they posited a contractual act in which he accepted English laws and Englishmen accepted him. The origin of English government could thus be placed in the actions of Englishmen themselves in a comfortably distant and nebulous past. It was not necessary, then, for the supporters of Parliament against Charles I to invent a popular basis for government, but simply to expand and make more explicit the supposed role of the people in originating and defining government. [913](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=913)

> The definition, of course, would have to confer on Parliament powers of government independent of, and preferably superior to, any that the people might have granted to the king. The immediate objective of the change in fictions was to magnify the power not of the people themselves, but of the people’s representatives. It did not originate in popular demonstrations against the king but in the contest between king and Parliament, a contest that had escalated to a point scarcely contemplated by the voters who chose the members of Parliament. Accordingly, the first formulations of popular sovereignty in England, from which it never quite escaped, elevated the people to supreme power by elevating their elected representatives. [918](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=918)

> The most articulate spokesman for the new ideology was Henry Parker, a barrister who became secretary to the Parliamentary army. Already in 1642 he and other Parliamentarians envisaged a nation that existed before it had a king or any other governing officer. According to this view, the people of the nation, exercising their God-given powers, chose to be governed by kings in hereditary succession (they might have chosen any other form of government). In making the choice they set limits to the king’s powers in fundamental laws and provided for possible subsequent limitations by their representatives in Parliament. The powers they conferred on the king were conditional upon his observance of those limitations. If he violated the trust placed in him, the people through their representatives could rightly resist him and in the last resort depose him—though Parliamentary spokesmen long denied any intention of doing so. [924](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=924)

spokesman for the new ideology 

>The very existence of such a thing as the people, capable of acting to empower, define, and limit a previously nonexistent government required a suspension of disbelief. History recorded no such action. [934](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=934)

> In the absence of historical record Parker and his friends could reconstruct the original donation of the people in terms that gave to Parliament a determining power in its dispute with the king. That [936](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=936)

> It was true, they acknowledged, that the people as such could not have assembled in order to confer power on anyone. The “vastness of its owne bulke” made direct action by the people impossible.9 Whole nations in general were “not congregable, nor consultable, nor redeemable from confusion.” It therefore followed that “both Kings and laws were first formed and created by such bodyes of men, as our Parliament now are.” And Parker easily slipped from imaginary bodies “such as our Parliament now are” to England’s Parliament as it now was and allegedly had been [939](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=939)

> “We may truly say of it,” he argued, “that by its Consent Royalty it selfe was first founded, and for its ends royalty it selfe was so qualified and tempered, as it is.”10 Since by this reasoning Parliament had in effect created the king and set limits on him, it was obvious that Parliament was the best judge of those limits: “from its supreme reason, the nature of that qualification and temperature ought only to be still learned, and the determination thereof sought. For who can better expound what Kings and lawes are, and for what end they were both created, then that unquestionable power, which for its own advantage merely gave creation to them both?”11 [944](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=944)

> This formulation involved a circularity that neither Parker nor other Parliamentary spokesmen ever acknowledged: it made Parliament its own creator. But it had the great advantage of endowing Parliament not simply with a part of the powers of government, but with the people’s inherent power to begin, change, and end governments. And however circular the reasoning, the attribution attained a degree of plausibility from the election of the House of Commons by what passed for a popular vote. Although it was a small minority of the population who voted, only a stretch of the imagination was required to envisage parliamentary elections as the act in which the people endowed Parliament with their sovereign power. That the direct action of the suppositious people should [950](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=950)

> Parliament needed popular support, needed men to fight the armies that the king raised, and needed money to pay them, but it did not want any body of people outside Parliament to take matters into their own hands. [956](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=956)

> It would not do to encourage the unruly to shelter under an illusion that they were the people. Mere people, however many in number, were not the people, and the sovereignty of the people must not be confused with the unauthorized actions of individuals or of crowds or even of organized groups outside Parliament. That the new ideology invited such confusion was apparent from the beginning. [959](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=959)

> Indeed the sovereignty of the people would have lost much of its usefulness for Parliament if it had been necessary to disavow any connection between the people and actual people outside Parliament. [963](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=963)

> The king and his adherents were not unaware of the advantages that the new fiction, if accepted, must give their opponents. Royal government, like any other government, rested on opinion, and the contest between king and Parliament was necessarily a contest of opinions. The fact that Royalists discounted the role of the people as a source of authority did not reduce their need for popular support, and ultimately their own appeals to people became appeals to the people. While cavalier fought roundhead in battle, their spokesmen fought the war of fictions in print. Official proclamations and pronouncements, remonstrances and declarations, accusations and rebuttals, all designed for public consumption, all aimed at winning popular support, accompanied every move by either side. And along with these lengthy official appeals came an equally unprecedented outpouring of unofficial pamphlets and newsletters addressed to a popular audience. [966](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=966)

> Because the new fictions did strain credulity, Royalists did their best to make the strain unbearable. And if sheer logic had determined the outcome, the sovereignty of the people might well have fallen back into obscurity under the Royalists’ onslaught. Where, they asked, did the people come from who were supposed to have exercised sovereignty in starting the government, either in England or anywhere else? They must have been without mothers or fathers, “like grasshoppers and locusts bred of the wind, or like Cadmus his men sprung out of the earth.”13 All mortal men that anyone had ever seen were born in subjection to authority. If they were born subjects, they could scarcely confer on others a power or authority they did not themselves possess. The whole concept of the will of the people was ridiculous anyhow, “for the people, to speak truly and properly, is a thing or body in continuall alteration and change, it never continues one minute the same, being composed of a multitude of parts, whereof divers continually decay and perish, and others renew and succeed in their places.” It followed that “they which are the people this minute, are not the people the next minute.”14 Moreover, the Parliament that claimed to represent this protean entity in fact represented only a small fraction of it. Women, children, and even the majority of adult males had no hand in the selection of representatives. And while some of the nation’s smallest boroughs and towns were assigned representatives, some of the largest were not.15 But even as they ridiculed the idea of a sovereign people embodied in a Parliament, royalists could not resist the temptation, by taking the idea at face value, to turn it against their opponents. [973](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=973)

that's the ratchet effect of justice! 

>“to be our Counsellors, not Commanders.” There was nothing in the writs to suggest that representatives were empowered to do anything else, certainly not, as the king reminded them, “to alter the Government of Church and State.”16 If [991](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=991)

> “Clearly,” said Sir John Spelman, one of the abler Royalists, “there is no such trust imparted to the [House of] Commons. Their trust is limited by the writ to advise with the King, not to make Acts and Ordinances in any case against him.”17 [994](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=994)

> If the people were sovereign, they could confer power wherever they chose. And this was no idle threat. As the struggle wore on, though the Parliamentary armies got the better of it, their spokesmen in the press were ready to concede that “the greater party are for the King.”23 [1008](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1008)

> Insofar as Royalists rejected popular sovereignty altogether, they were arguing a lost cause. But in challenging Parliament’s claim to be the sole repository of that sovereignty, they expanded the dimensions of the fiction and contributed to its future success as the basis of modern government. Political [1011](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1011)

> If that body itself could not be seen or heard at any given time or place, it might nevertheless give proof of its existence, like the existence of God, if those in power could be made to recognize as emanating from it a set of principles, commandments, limits, a set of “fundamental constitutions,” superior to the government itself. Such [1018](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1018)

> The limitations of the Parliamentary view became apparent in the first responses to the Royalist challenge, which did not go beyond hurt surprise and dogmatic denials. Implicitly acknowledging Royalist popularity, Parliamentary spokesmen complained of desertion. Those who forsook Parliament for the king, they said, “forsake themselves, their Religion, Lawes, and Properties, and all that can properly be called theirs.”24 Parliament was not simply the representative of the people, it was the people: “the Parliament men are no other than our selves, and therefore we cannot desert them, except we desert our selves.”25 Or, as another Parliamentary apologist put it, “their judgement is our judgment, and they that oppose the judgment of the Parliament oppose their own judgment.”26 Desertion of Parliament was not only self-destructive, it was wicked. “There can be nothing under Heaven,” Parker declared, “next to renouncing God, which can be more perfidious and more pernitious in the people than this.”27 Others suggested that those guilty of “ungrateful and unworthy disrespect unto the Parliament . . . may onely learne better, when better taught by the Parliaments lash.”28 From such premises it is no surprise to find lawyers on the Parliamentary side arguing that Parliament “can do no wrong,” that “no dishonourable thing ought to be imagined of them,” and that “Kings seduced may injure the commonwealth, but that Parliaments cannot.”29 [1024](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1024)

quotes 

>When “the most substantiall Inhabitants of the Citie of London” petitioned for less intransigence in Parliamentary negotiations with the king, Parliament replied that its status as trustee for the whole kingdom did not permit it to accommodate a part of the kingdom (that is, the petitioners), and in a burst of candor admitted that “we love not to be solli-cited at all by the people in any case whatsoever, except when we do manifestly faile of our Dutie.”31 It did not say who was to judge when such failure was manifest. By 1647 when Parliament was petitioned for a wide spectrum of reforms, including greater religious freedom, it ordered the petition to be burned by the common hangman.32 [1043](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1043)

> Pride’s Purge, [1052](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1052)

the parliament in rebellion against Charles got smaller and smaller 

>Therefore, he argued, only those powers could be entrusted which served that purpose, “for as by nature, no man may abuse, torment, or afflict himselfe; so by nature, no man may give that power to another, seeing he may not doe it himselfe.”45 John Cook, a barrister and a Leveller sympathizer, put it more positively: “free men can give away their freedom no further then as it conduceth to justice universal and particular.”46 In other words, in the language of a later age, some human rights and powers were inalienable. [1144](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1144)

> All were products of the “Norman yoke,” [1153](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1153)

> These last, including Magna Carta and the Petition of Right, they regarded as “but a part of the peoples rights and liberties . . . wrestled out of the pawes of those Kings, who by force had conquered the Nation, changed the laws and by strong hand held them in bondage.”49 The Levellers had reached this [1157](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1157)

> What the Levellers proposed was an “Agreement of the People” to be signed by every Englishman who agreed to transfer to his representatives the powers specified therein. (What would happen to those who did not agree is not altogether clear.) [1163](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1163)

> The specific prohibitions and injunctions to be laid on the king-less, lordless Parliament in this Agreement reflected the experience of the preceding years. Among other things, besides the limitations contained in Magna Carta and the Petition of Right, Parliament was excluded from power over religion, power to impress men for the army or navy, power to grant legal privileges or exemptions to any individual or group, power to imprison for debt or to impose severe penalties for trivial offenses, or to require accused persons to answer incriminating questions, or to “levell mens Estates, destroy Propriety, or make all things Common.”51 [1165](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1165)

> it. William Sedgwick, an army chaplain, after arguing that power had reverted from Parliament to the people, proclaimed that “This Army are truly the people of England, and have the nature and power of the whole in them.” They were, he said, “the very breast and strength of England.” They had in them “the soule and life of the nation.” They were “unquestionably to be entitled the people of England.” In the light of such a perfect identification with “the whole kingdom in their true and right sense” it was ridiculous for the army to concern itself further with an Agreement of the People.58 The reasoning by which Sedgwick arrived at this conclusion revealed a tendency that would shape many future apologies for whatever powers claimed to act for the people. He spoke of the people only “in their true and right sense,” which was not the more literal sense that the Levellers had in mind. The army, according to Sedgwick, were “truly the people, not in agrosse heape, or in a heavy, dull body, but in a selected, choice way: They are the people in virtue, spirit and power, gathered up into heart and union, and so most able and fit for the worke they have in hand: The people, in grosse, being a monster, an unweildy, rude bulke of no use.”59 [1211](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1211)

> As the authorization of government moved farther and farther from any actual designation by popular choice, characterizations of the people as such became less and less flattering. They were the “giddy multitude,” “beasts in men’s shapes,” who would destroy themselves if given a chance. It was “not vox, but saluspopuli” that must determine; “major reason” must prevail over “major voice.”60 These were not the sentiments of Royalists but of advocates for both Parliament and the army. Thus the Reverend John Goodwin, a frequent spokesman for the powers that be, justified Pride’s Purge on the grounds that it was proper “to save the life of a lunatique or distracted person even against his will” and went on to argue that “if a people be depraved and corrupt, so as to conferre places of power and trust upon wicked and undeserving men, they forfeit their power in this behalf unto those that are good, though but a few. So that nothing pretended from a non-concurrence of the people with the Army, will hold water.”61 That the people in mass were not to be trusted with their own welfare was apparent from “the childish Love the Common people beare the gaudy person of a King.”62 They must be saved from themselves, for they were “so much deluded with the greatnesse of the King” that they thought it had been improper to resist him.63 The Levellers did not share this view of the people and continued to press for an Agreement of the People, to be implemented by the express consent of individuals throughout England and to be treated also as a contract between representatives and their constituents. After the king’s execution, which went beyond the deposition that the Levellers favored, they protested vehemently against “England’s New Chains” imposed by the army and by the Rump in governing without the authorization of the people and without regard to the limits that would have been set by an Agreement of the People.64 [1222](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1222)

revelers saw king as protector against gentry 

>J. G. A. Pocock, The Ancient Constitution and the Feudal Law (Cambridge, England, 1957). But cf. John Wallace, Destiny his Choice: the Loyalism of Andrew Marvell (Cambridge, England, 1968, 22–30. 7 Henry Parker, Some Few Observations upon his Majesties [1256](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1256)

> 31 The Petition of the most substantiall Inhabitants of the Citie of London (London, 1642). 32 Don M. Wolfe, ed., Leveller Manifestoes of the Puritan Revolution (New York, 1944, 1967), 131–41. 33 See in general David [1305](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1305)

> Wolfe, Leveller Manifestoes, 223–34, 291–303, 311–21, 397–410. [1346](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1346)

> Ibid., 230. See also Haller and Davies, Leveller Tracts, 426: [1349](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1349)

> Woodhouse, Puritanism and Liberty, 1– [1354](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1354)

> In place of an Agreement of the People that would limit the government, this offered the Rump Parliament and its military masters a blank check to govern as they pleased, unhampered even by the traditional restrictions that had hedged in the older royal government. [1381](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1381)

> It was the solemn duty of all men to obey whoever had the force, because “it is not possible that any can attain to the height of power without Gods disposall of it into his hands.” [1385](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1385)

> The Agreement, he charged, with its inclusion of the Leveller provision for annual elections and extension of the suffrage, would have resulted in “unlearned, ignorant Persons, neither of Learning nor Fortune, being put in Authority.” The “self-opinionated Multitude” would have elected “the lowest of the People” who like some of their Roman predecessors would have occupied themselves with “Milking and Gelding the Purses of the Rich,” an outcome that would have proved “the ready Road to all licentiousnesses, mischief, mere Anarchy and Confusion.”4 [1392](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1392)

instinct against petty private interests 

>If the government by king, Lords, and Commons, sworn to in the Solemn League and Covenant, was to be altered, it must be done by the people themselves, not by representatives chosen by the army out of representatives chosen by the people to be a part of that government which the army and the Rump had destroyed (“It being beyond the power of the constituted, and onely in the Constitutors to make such an alteration in the fundamental Constitution”).7 [1407](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1407)

> Although those who spoke up against the engagement did not offer any plan of how the people might go about setting up a new government if they in fact wished to, they were clear that they could not have done it in elections to the House of Commons: “A Power to constitute a new fundamentall and Supreme Government was never committed, granted or entrusted, either anciently or lately to that House, that ever wee heard or can believe. All that (to our understandings) they can claime from the People, is a power to bee of the Government and Constitution, as one integrall; not to bee the Constitutors of it, as efficients, or the sole and plenipotentiarie transformers of it, or the founders of another.”8 [1412](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=1412)

> government to anarchy. They agreed among themselves to submit to a government of their own devising, in what would later be called a social contract, and they sometimes set limits to it in what could be called a “fundamental constitution.” The “Mayflower Compact,” agreed to aboard ship before the settlers disembarked, was later hailed by John Quincy Adams as “perhaps the only instance, in human history, of that positive, original social compact, which speculative philosophers have imagined as the only legitimate source of government.”1 And the state of Connecticut now dubs itself the Constitution State because of the so-called “Fundamental Orders” that the settlers agreed to in 1639. These improvised devices were later confirmed or replaced by royal grants, but they furnished a factual foundation on which the sovereignty of the people could build. [2287](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=2287)

> William Penn, the founder of Pennsylvania, was fond of dipping into ancient records and professed to have found a meeting of the whole kingdom still functioning under King Ina in the eighth century, consisting of the “generality of the Free-men of the Kingdom; for all might come that pleased. . . . But as. . . the number of Free-men encreased, there was a Necessity for a Representative.”1 [4045](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=4045)

> James I, the great exponent of the king’s divine right, envisioned representative assemblies in his time as a convenience, whether for himself or for his subjects. In one of the little lectures in which he periodically instructed the House of Commons about who and what they were, he told them that because the numbers were too great “for all the gentlemen and burgesses [of the kingdom] to be present at every parliament therefore a certain number is selected and chosen out of that great body, serving only for that parliament where their persons are the representation of that body.”2 James [4050](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=4050)

> Thus William Ball, in 1645, denying that the king could thwart the actions of a parliament elected by the people, thought it proper to add parenthetically, “if the people without confusion or disorder could assemble together, there were no need of such election.”3 [4056](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=4056)

> After American representative assemblies had taken control of government in the Revolution, it remained a truism, as one member of the federal convention of 1787 put it, that representation was “an expedient by which an assembly of certain individuals chosen by the people is substituted in place of the inconvenient meeting of the people themselves.” [4060](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=4060)

> John Page of Virginia asserted that “If it were consistent with the peace and tranquility of the inhabitants, every freeman would have a right to come and give his vote.”5 [4063](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=4063)

> If they were representatives, what were they representatives of? An honest answer, in Patrick Henry’s phrase, was that they were mere “representatives of representatives.”2 [5082](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=5082)

> If Americans had generally considered representation compatible with indirection election, they might have accepted Congress as a representative body and might therefore have been willing to grant it the powers of a representative body, particularly the power to tax. Continentally minded reformers began proposing such a grant almost as soon as Congress came into existence, arguing that the members were indeed representatives of the people.3 On two occasions their arguments almost prevailed: they almost succeeded in gaining for Congress a very limited power to tax, power to levy a five percent duty on imports into any of the United States. But every scheme of this kind before 1787 foundered in the end on the reluctance of Americans to trust governmental powers to any body not subject to the veto of their locally elected representatives. If [5097](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=5097)

> To endow Congress with powers to tax, it was said, would be to give it the kind of powers that Charles I had claimed in the famous ship money cases of the 1630s and that Parliament, in the grip of a corrupt executive, had claimed in the 1760s and 1770s.4 [5105](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=5105)

> assemblies would be much too large to function as a single body. And it would be as impracticable for the people of all the various towns and counties of the country to be represented in it as it would have been for them to be represented in Parliament. This argument does not seem to have been made before 1787, but as soon as a national house of representatives was proposed, it was, as we shall see. That no one proposed such a thing before 1787 was probably owing in part to an awareness of the reaction it would bring. [5113](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=5113)

> 1787. In Rhode Island the legislature had made its worthless paper money a legal tender in payment of debts, and gleeful debtors pursued their creditors to pay them off. In Massachusetts the farmers in the western counties, despite the fact that the state constitution gave them more than their fair share of representation in the legislature, had risen in arms, closed the courts, and seized a United States arsenal. Similar [5117](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=5117)

> There they could be expected to pursue their aims, which one member of Congress depicted hysterically as “the abolition of debts public and private, a division of property and a new government founded on principles of fraud and iniquity, or reconnexion with Great Britain.”7 In Virginia too the western counties clamored for more paper money, and mobs closed the courts and burned courthouses and prisons.8 The situation [5122](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=5122)

> it looked to many like the fulfillment of the predictions of civil war that conservatives had made in 1776. John Marshall, the future chief justice, thought that without the creation of an effective national government, nothing could prevent “Anarchy first, and civil convulsions afterwards.”9 Another Virginian, James Madison, thought that the reputation of republican government had been dealt “inexpressible injury,” and observed that leading minds were exhibiting an alarming “propensity toward Monarchy.”10 [5126](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=5126)

> the great Constitutional Convention of 1787. That convention, which Madison was instrumental in bringing about, did not conform to the ideal prescription for simulating an exercise of constituent power by the people, for the members were chosen by the state legislatures, not directly by popular vote. But even before the convention met, Madison recognized that it could achieve the objectives he had in mind for it only by appealing to a popular sovereignty not hitherto fully recognized, to the people of the United States as a whole. They alone could be thought to stand superior to the people of any single state. And what Madison had most directly in view was to overcome the deficiencies of the locally oriented representatives who sat in the state legislatures. To that end he envisioned a genuine national government, resting for its authority, not on the state governments and not even on the peoples of the several states considered separately, but on an American people, a people who constituted a separate and superior entity, capable of conveying to a national government an authority that would necessarily impinge on the authority of the state governments. [5132](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=5132)

> As the English House of Commons in the 1640s had invented a sovereign people to overcome a sovereign king, Madison was inventing a sovereign American people to overcome the sovereign states. It was not one of those inventions for which the world was unprepared, but an invention crying out for realization. The Revolution had created a fund of national feeling and a whole class of men who had committed their lives and fortunes to a common cause that seemed to be dissolving in victory. To [5141](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=5141)

> It is well known that Madison had been reading David Hume’s “Idea of a Perfect Commonwealth,” Hume’s attempt to improve on Harrington’s Oceana. [5151](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=5151)

> Hume’s scheme of government was almost as bewildering as Harrington’s, with a pyramidal succession of governing bodies. What caught Madison’s eye was its rejection of the popular assumption that republican government was suited only to small countries. On the contrary, Hume maintained, a large republic was preferable to a small, because in it “there is compass and room enough to refine the democracy, from the lower people, who may be admitted into the first elections or first concoction of the commonwealth, to the higher magistrates, who direct all the movements. At the same time, the parts are so distant and remote that ‘tis very difficult, either by intrigue, prejudice, or passion, to hurry them into any measures against the public interest.”11 [5152](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=5152)

> Madison seized on Hume’s insight. The trouble with the representative assemblies of the states was that the states were too small. [5158](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=5158)

> “There has not been any moment since the peace,” he wrote to Washington, “at which the representatives of the union would have given an assent to paper money or any other measure of a kindred nature.”14 [5168](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00F21VXXK&location=5168)
