# Race, War, and Remembrance in the Appalachian South
by John C. Inscoe

_(Last annotated on March 22, 2014)_

> group, as far as gathering our work between single book covers. Much of the best and most cutting-edge scholarship on the region has appeared in essay collections, most of which still provide invaluable samplers of different approaches and perspectives to similar topics and issues. These include Appalachia in the Making, edited by Dwight B. Billings, Mary Beth Pudup, and Altina Waller (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995); Confronting Appalachian Stereotypes: Back Talk from an American Region, edited by Dwight B. Billings, Gurney Norman, and Katherine E. Ledford (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1999); Appalachian Frontiers: Settlement, Society & Development in the Preindustrial Era, edited by Robert Mitchell (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1991); The Civil War in Appalachia: Collected Essays, edited by Kenneth W. Noe and Shannon H. Wilson (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1997); Diversity and Accommodation: Essays on the Cultural Composition of the Virginia Frontier, edited by Michael J. Puglisi (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1997); High Mountains Rising: Appalachia in Time and Place, edited by Richard A. Straw and H. Tyler Blethen (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2004); The Handbook of Appalachia: An Introduction to the Region, edited by Grace Toney Edwards, JoAnn A. Asbury, and Ricky L. Cox (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006); The Civil War’s Aftermath in Appalachia, edited by Andrew L. Slap (forthcoming from the University Press of Kentucky); and Appalachians and Race (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2001), which I edited. I feel privileged to have been a part of a few of these projects; several of the pieces here were originally commissioned for such volumes. I am particularly grateful to the various editors who called on me to write them, and for their feedback as they worked their way into print. I’m especially grateful (location 122)

Note: books!

> Historians have often skirted the question, but none of them has yet tackled it nearly as directly as have literary interpreters of the region. Two works of early twentieth-century fiction are particularly striking in their portrayals of the contradictory assumptions regarding racism among southern highlanders. Both works, one a short story and one a novel, use the Civil War as the catalyst through which mountain whites confront not only blacks for the first time but their own racist proclivities as well. In so doing, the authors give dramatic form to the deep-seated discrepancies that have long plagued popular and scholarly ideas regarding the relationship between these two groups of southerners. (location 355)

> The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come, John Fox (location 361)

> William Faulkner examined highland racial attitudes from another, far more dramatic angle. In a 1932 short story, “Mountain Victory,” he wrote of a Confederate major from Mississippi and his slave, who in heading home from Virginia just after the end of the Civil War, come upon a Tennessee mountain family and ask to spend the night in their cabin. (location 371)

> “So it’s my face and not my uniform. And you fought four years to free us, I understand.” (location 375)

> In The Hills Beyond, his semifictional interpretation of his region’s history, Asheville native Thomas Wolfe claimed that the mountain people had not owned slaves and that in many counties, “Negroes were unknown before the war.”7 (location 400)

> Flannery O’Connor based one of her most celebrated stories, “The Artificial Nigger,” on the premise that mountaineers had no contacts with blacks. (location 402)

> communal experiments, such as North Carolina’s “Kingdom of the Happy Land” and Kentucky’s Coe Ridge, were established by former slaves moving into the region from antebellum plantation homes elsewhere.12 From (location 421)

> Like W. J. Cash’s The Mind of the South, most treatments of mountain racism have characterized it as a single and simple mentality. But unlike Cash, who took more than 400 pages to describe the regional “mind” as he saw it, most of what has been written about southern highlanders’ racial views has been consigned to slight and usually casual references, based on conjecture, exaggeration, and overgeneralization. (location 430)

> What makes the topic so intriguing is the sharp dichotomy that characterizes opinions as to how white mountaineers viewed blacks. On the one hand is the assumption on which Faulkner drew heavily—highlanders’ inherent fear of and intense hostility toward the race that they alone among southerners did not know or control. Conversely there is the more extensively supported notion that the mountains were a southern oasis of abolitionism and racial liberality. Despite the pervasiveness of both schools of thought, proponents of one never seem to have acknowledged the other, much less made any direct effort to discredit it. (location 435)

> Cash’s Mind of the South had much to do with giving widespread credence to the idea of mountain hostility to blacks. His one relevant statement is among the most often quoted: “Though there were few slaves in the mountains,” the mountaineer “had acquired a hatred and contempt for the Negro even more virulent than that of the common white of the lowlands; a dislike so rabid that it was worth a black man’s life to venture into many mountain sections.”15 This was a belief to which mountain residents and chroniclers of the region had long adhered. (location 439)

> William Styron made a similar point in The Confessions of Nat Turner, perhaps the most insightful portrait of the slaveholding South in modern fiction. In attempting to explain why Joseph Travis split a slave family by selling a mother and child south, he noted that Travis had moved to Southampton County from “the wild slopes of the Blue Ridge mountains.” Styron, in Nat’s voice, speculates: “Maybe it was his mountain heritage, his lack of experience with Tidewater ways, that caused him to do something that no truly respectable slaveowner would do.”18 (location 454)

> The concept of Appalachia as a bastion of liberty was well developed by the time the Civil War broke out, largely because the area was seen as a refuge for escaped slaves. The region was considered part of the Underground Railroad out of the South, where according to one contemporary source, “rugged mountaineers forfeited life for the furtherance of the means of justice, and mingled blood . . . with the blood of millions of slaves.”20 More recently, Boston social worker Leon Williams described the region as “settled to a substantial degree by slaves and indentured white servants fleeing from exploitation and angry with established colonial America.” “The hills, in their exquisite isolation,” he continued, “became havens for the disenchanted black and white . . . who needed to escape burdensome drudgery and slavery.”21 (location 465)

> When Brown finally attacked Harpers Ferry twelve years later, the highlands were still crucial to his aims. He hoped to move south through Virginia and the Carolinas, liberating the slaves of the plantation piedmont and sending them to a chain of fortresses established in the mountains to their west, from which they would hold their opponents at bay as reinforcements, black and white, gathered to form an army of liberation. (location 484)

> “Freedom has always loved the air of mountains. Slavery, like malaria, desolates the low alluvials of the globe.”25 (location 492)

> “Explain it as we may,” he preached, “there belongs to mountain regions a moral elevation of their own. They give birth to strong, free, pure and noble races. They lift the men who dwell among them, in thought and resolve. Slavery, falsehood, base compliance, luxury, belong to the plains. Freedom, truth, hardy sacrifice, simple honor, to the highlands.”26 (location 495)

> the creation of “Holy Appalachia”—as Allen Batteau termed it in his study of the region’s “invention” by outside interests—was under way. It was a creation based on rather convoluted reasoning. The admiration for the Anglo-Saxon purity of mountaineers’ identity carried with it the implication that a conscious rejection of slavery on ideological grounds played a major part in their lack of racial or ethnic contamination. Abraham Lincoln became part of this increasingly idealized formula and emerged as a patron saint to a later generation of mountain residents.27 (location 498)

> in some vague way “these poorer mountaineers, fiercely independent as they were, found something abhorrent in the ownership of one person by another.” John Fox’s idealistic young hero in The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come was not, Caudill maintained, “the only mountaineer to risk or endure death on the battlefields because of a sincere desire to see the shackles stricken from millions of men and women.”28 (location 505)

> Another major factor that contributed to the image of Appalachia as “holy” ground was the establishment of several abolitionist footholds in the region. (location 508)

> As early as 1797 a Knoxville newspaper advocated the forming of an abolition society, and the next decade saw Benjamin Lundy fulfilling that charge in Wheeling. Lundy later moved to northeastern Tennessee, where he joined a number of “New Light” Presbyterians and Quakers from Pennsylvania and Ohio, who established what were among the nation’s first manumission societies and produced the earliest antislavery publications. By 1827, according to one claim, East Tennessee had one-fifth of the abolition societies in the United States and almost a fifth of the national membership.29 But most organized efforts were phased out or moved elsewhere within a few years; Maryville College in Blount County remained the only substantial base of antislavery activity for the rest of the antebellum period.30 (location 511)

> But much of Ruffner’s agenda and the basis for much of the initial enthusiasm for his proposal grew out of resentment of sectional inequities that benefited the Tidewater slaveholding elite at the expense of westerners. Once constitutional reforms in 1851 alleviated many of those perceived abuses, support for Ruffner’s emancipation scheme evaporated.31 (location 521)

> Berea College stood as a model of interracial education from its origins in the 1850s until almost the end of the century, the product of Kentucky-born, Ohio-educated abolitionist John Fee’s quest for “a practical recognition of the brotherhood of man.” Ellen Semple cited Berea as an example of “the democratic spirit characteristic of all mountain people” and concluded that its location on the western margin of the Cumberland Plateau was “probably the only geographic location south of the Mason and Dixon line where such an institution could exist.”32 As unusual as this experiment was in the postbellum, much less the antebellum, South, one can hardly credit its existence to Appalachian liberality. The school’s turn-of-the-century shift to an exclusive mission aimed at mountain whites and preservation of their folk arts bestowed on Berea a reputation as a cultural center of Appalachia. Fee himself never thought of Berea as being located in the mountains. “We are in the ‘hill country,’ ” he wrote in 1867, “between the ‘blue grass’ & the mountains. From the former region we now draw our colored men, from the latter the young white men & ladies.”33 (location 525)

Note: I.e. founded by outsiders?

> Woodson, himself a black Appalachian native, published his landmark 1916 essay, “Freedom and Slavery in Appalachia,” in the very first issue of the Journal of Negro History, which he founded and edited. He maintained that the Scotch-Irish who settled the southern highlands, a “liberty-loving, and tyrant-hating race,” exhibited “more prejudice against the slave holder than against the Negro.” He stressed their antislavery sentiment in the region as pervasive and ongoing. Woodson’s geographic scope was deceptively broad, however, encompassing far more than the southern highlands. As much of his essay deals with abolitionist activity in piedmont North Carolina and central Kentucky as it does with those short-lived efforts in East Tennessee.34 (location 537)

> Don West, a native of north Georgia and cofounder of the Highlander Folk School, relied on only scattered evidence—from the East Tennessee abolitionists to incidents of Confederate disaffection in north Georgia—to draw even more generalized conclusions regarding mountain liberalism on racial matters. From these few examples he claimed to demonstrate that the mountain South “consistently opposed slavery” and “refused to go with the Confederacy.” The southern mountaineer, West wrote, “may be said to have held the Lincoln attitude generally.”35 (location 543)

> West, too, drew on his own childhood memories to make the same case. He recalled that he never saw a black person until he was fifteen years old, when his family had moved from Georgia’s mountains to sharecrop in the cotton country of Cobb County. Unfamiliar with the racial mores of the lowland South, the Wests welcomed their black neighbors as guests in their home and at their dinner table, much to the chagrin of local whites. When asked about it, his mother replied that she had always been taught to treat people equally, an attitude West claimed “was indicative of the sentiment of many people in the Appalachian South.”36 (location 552)

> So what is one to make of these extreme contradictions regarding highland attitudes toward blacks? Both contain significant elements of truth and perhaps even accurately convey the sentiments of certain pockets of southern highland society. However, there is another body of evidence that, while by no means either comprehensive or systematic, can be mustered in support of the idea that southern mountaineers were first and foremost southerners and that they viewed slavery and race in terms not unlike those of their yeoman or even slaveholding counterparts elsewhere in the South. (location 556)

> her face” when Olmsted informed her that blacks in New York were free. “I would n’t want to live where niggers are free,” she said. “They are bad enough when they are slaves. . . . If they was to think themselves equal to we, I do n’t think white folks could abide it—they’re such vile saucy things.”37 Olmsted and others after him recognized the degree to which class resentment was also at the core of whatever opposition mountaineers felt toward slavery and its beneficiaries. (location 570)

Note: lots of examples of how Appalachia s were in fact racist

> The strong racial prejudices in areas without a black populace were not a phenomenon limited to the mountain South. Other Americans in nonslaveholding parts of the country were hostile to the few blacks, if any, they lived with and felt threatened by future prospects of a black influx. Alexis de Tocqueville had observed this racism without tangible targets during his visit to America in 1831. “In no part of the Union in which negroes are no longer slaves,” he wrote, “they have in nowise drawn nearer to the whites. On the contrary, the prejudice of the race appears to be stronger in the states which have abolished slavery, than in those where it still exists; and nowhere is it so intolerant as in those states where servitude has never been known.”44 (location 598)

Note: racism without a targeting ct

> Many mountain Unionists felt betrayed by Lincoln when he issued his Emancipation Proclamation in September 1862, and some even abandoned their loyalist stance as a result. Former congressman Thomas A. R. Nelson, one of East Tennessee’s most influential antisecessionist voices in 1861, declared two years later that he would have advocated secession if he “had believed it was the object of the North to subjugate the South and emancipate our slaves.” “The Union men of East Tennessee,” he declared emphatically, “are not now and never were Abolitionists.”49 The very fact that mountain slaveholders were among the most ardent Unionists is indication enough that abolition was hardly the basis of their anti-Confederate tendencies. Both Zebulon Vance and Andrew Johnson had modest slaveholdings, and many who owned far more slaves were equally as resistant to secession. Analysis of election returns in western North Carolina on a referendum to hold a secession convention indicates a fairly even split between slaveholders and little or no correlation between a county’s slave population and its vote on secession.50 Perhaps the most striking example of (location 632)

> Studies of north Georgia’s mountain counties also indicate that the few residents with substantial slaveholdings were actively Unionist and in several instances served in the Union rather than the Confederate army.52 Likewise in those parts of Southern Appalachia where support for secession was strong, highlanders’ concerns about slavery’s future under a Republican regime was a vital factor in shaping that support. (location 645)

> Confederacy has generally been attributed to the independence and individualism inherent in mountaineers. Even more vaguely, as a western Carolinian wrapped in the romance of the “lost cause” explained in 1905, the mountain South seceded not as a defense of slavery but, rather, over “the real issue . . . a lofty and patriotic sense of duty which animated the Southern people of all classes.”54 (location 652)

> 12. Sadie Smathers Patton, “The Kingdom of the Happy Land” (Asheville: Stephens Press, 1957); Sam Gray and Theda Perdue, “Appalachia as the Promised Land: A Freedmen’s Commune in Henderson County, North Carolina, 1870–1920,” paper presented at the meeting of the American Anthropological Association, 1979, Lexington, Ky.; William Lynwood Montell, The Saga of Coe Ridge: A Study in Oral History (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1970). For other treatments of the postwar black population in Appalachia, see William H. Turner, “The Demography of Black Appalachia, Past and Present,” in Turner and Cabbell, Blacks in Appalachia, 237–61; Michael A. Cooke, “Race Relations in Montgomery County, Virginia, 1870–1990,” in Barker, Environmental Voices, 94–104; Sprague, “From Slavery to Freedom,” 72–73; and Wilson, Southern Mountaineers, 41–42. (location 823)

Note: black post civil war communes!

> When, in early 1863, a Confederate rifle factory in Asheville faced labor shortages as military demands drained much of its original white male workforce, slaves became the logical and most accessible replacements. An advertisement for “ten negro men” in March was the first in a continuing effort by the armory’s commander, Captain Benjamin Stone, to employ a biracial workforce in rifle production. His recruitment campaign for hired black labor also contributed to the influx of lowland slaves into the Asheville area.15 Calvin Cowles, the most energetic of Wilkes County’s entrepreneurs, was fully aware of the financial opportunities made available by the new demand and was equally aggressive in seeking to bring new slave labor into the area, particularly through hiring contracts that allowed him to sublet those he had hired to his neighbors and relatives. His correspondence during the war’s first two years is full of pleas to slaveholders in which he confirmed the rich opportunities such portable property offered in his own area. He informed a Mississippi business contact of the high demand particularly for adult males, then commanding annual rental rates of $125 or $150.16 (location 1704)

> Such activity was constant and involved sales as well as hirings, as numerous mountain masters took full advantage of new opportunities to both buy and sell black property. More often than not, such transactions were negotiated locally, but they were never confined to their own region. Just as Woodfin sought slaves for purchase in Charleston and Savannah, so he and others were very much aware of current prices in such major markets and the options for sale or purchase they continued to offer. In May 1863, Calvin Cowles advised his sister in the aftermath of the capture of her two unruly runaways: “Robert could have been sold in Charleston for $2500, but I presume you allowed your philanthropy to influence you in marketing him—he is with old friends. In Wash’s case, I advise you that you put him on the block in Richmond. . . . He has forfeited all claims on your sympathy—get the most you can for him.”22 (location 1749)

> The Bells moved from north Georgia to Franklin, North Carolina, in 1860. Alfred, a dentist, had grown up in Macon County and returned to be near his father and other family members. He opened a dental practice and bought a small farm just outside of town. The young couple was not among the eleven slaveholders in the village, but like many of their nonslaveholding neighbors, they took advantage of both the white and black manpower sources available in the community. From their arrival until at least the end of 1862, they entrusted their farm to a white tenant and employed two slaves, Tom and Liza, both hired on an annual basis from the county’s largest supplier, Dillard Love, whose ninety-five slaves made him western North Carolina’s fifth largest slaveholder in 1860.29 After Alfred Bell’s enlistment and departure from home at the head of his own Confederate company in November 1861, Mary continued to rely on the labor of their tenant and hired slaves. Yet they were more determined than ever to purchase slaves of their own. As a result of certain profitable investments, Mary’s collection of back payments for her husband’s dental services, and their share in Alf’s family’s jewelry business, the Bells were in the unusual position of having accumulated considerable capital early in the war, and like many young southern couples in earlier years, they saw slaves as a natural, indeed sound, investment. By December 1862, Alf was particularly eager to take such a step because he was nervous about the stability of the Confederate currency they were accumulating. “I don’t think it good policy to keep money on hand,” he wrote to Mary. “I want you to invest what you have in something, either for a negro or land.” He trusted her judgment in choosing which, and thanked God he had a wife “who is not extravagant and is always trying to lay something up for the future.”30 (location 1810)

> mistresses were not more sensitive in recognizing the increasing lack of complacency on the part of their slaves as symptomatic of the institution’s imminent collapse. And yet there is little evidence that most drew any linkage between their personal problems with individual slaves and broader patterns of unrest or acknowledged the all too ominous reasons for this shift in behavior. Alexander H. Jones of Hendersonville, one of the mountain region’s most outspoken and influential Unionists, had expressed great impatience at secessionists’ efforts to make slavery central to their arguments for leaving the Union. News of Lincoln’s election, he wrote, were met with the howl of “nigger, nigger, nigger, as though the salvation of the whole world depended upon the negro and slavery.”39 Highlanders, like southerners elsewhere, did indeed make slavery’s security a basic part of their rhetoric for or against secession, and with the war’s end, the system’s abolishment would prove its most revolutionary and long-lasting effect in that region as in most others. Yet ironically, once the war was under way and for much of its duration, slavery was among the aspects of the mountain economy and social structure that suffered least. The disruptions and discipline problems slave owners faced remained, from their own perspectives, mere inconveniences; few interpreted such developments as ominous signs of the institution’s collapse. The relative stability of the system, the increased demand for and market value of slave property, and its ever more crucial role in meeting the region’s labor demands and agricultural productivity—all combined to create a false sense of optimism and complacency on the part of mountain masters. Such vitality was especially conspicuous in the midst of a region that, in many other ways, felt the full brunt of the conflict’s destructive and disruptive forces. Such contradictions in the Confederacy’s highland home fronts testify to the remarkable variation that characterized the peculiar institution throughout its hold on the American South. Even in its death throes, both the means and the rate at which slavery finally dissolved were subject to the particularities of local circumstances and the exigencies of war. For the mountains of North Carolina at least, that meant a final burst of profiteering and profits among slave owners oblivious to how sudden and complete their losses would be in the spring of 1865. (location 1891)

> The big question all this raises, of course, is why two adjacent and such similar regions parted ways so dramatically as the secession crisis came to a head in the upper South. Much attention and analysis has been devoted to East Tennessee, due not only to the unusual intensity of its Unionism, but also to its military value as the largest predominantly loyal geographic area within the Confederacy (Lincoln saw it as a key to Union strategy early in the war), and to the fact that both the region and its political situation produced the next president of the United States. The standard explanations for its course have always been its small numbers of slaves and slaveholders, its sectional slights within the state, its strong Whig traditions, and the relative poverty it faced outside the Cotton Belt. All of these seem logical enough as causes for its Unionism until one considers them in juxtaposition with that far less fully explored situation in western North Carolina. That all the same factors were behind such different sentiments and consequences tends to undermine the significance of any of them as decisive in shaping the East Tennesseans’ distinctive response to the secessionist crisis. I propose that the crucial difference between antebellum East Tennessee and western North Carolina lay in their self-images—that is, how residents of each section perceived themselves and their region in relation to their respective states and to the South as a whole. Those differences, as demonstrated largely by the rhetoric and writings of those most influential public opinion shapers—their political leaders and journalists—are striking and go far toward explaining the contrasting actions each section took in the spring of 1861. Many western Carolinians, for example, tended to view their part of the state as a region on the rise. A number of spokesmen for highland North Carolina were quite active in promoting their economic potential through an ever-increasing public appreciation for its distinctive land, mineral, forest, and climatic resources and conditions. The French Broad River valley was one of several in the region described as among the nation’s richest sections of agricultural abundance and diversity.20 Other efforts at local boosterism stressed the special qualities of terrain and growing season throughout the Carolina mountains, and a number of model farms were established by both local landholders and seasonal residents that demonstrated the rich possibilities of highland soil and climate. University of North Carolina geologist Elisha Mitchell did much to publicize the mountains’ potential for becoming “the New England of the South,” and Thomas Clingman, the district’s congressman through the late 1840s and much of the 1850s, vigorously promoted projects to develop his region’s production and marketability of dairy products, sheep, and even wine.21 Contacts between the Carolina mountains (location 2157)

> they can get it.”28 Brownlow proclaimed, “Johnson is right!” and elaborated: “We can never live in a Southern Confederacy and be made hewers of wood and drawers of water for a set of aristocrats and overbearing tyrants. . . . We have no interest in common with the Cotton States. We are a grain-growing and stock-raising people, and we can conduct a cheap government, inhabiting the Switzerland of America.”29 Oliver Temple later wrote of these months: “The overpowering influence of slavery, the fear of falling under the condemnation of the mighty oligarchy of slaveholders, to some extent paralyzed the minds of men” in East Tennessee.30 It is important to note that this fear of slaveholding power did not grow out of an abhorrence of the system itself, a conclusion that might logically be drawn since East Tennessee had been the site of the South’s most fully developed antislavery movement. Probably as a result of an early influx of Methodists and Quakers (location 2227)

> institution.31 One of the major arguments embraced by Andrew Johnson and other Unionist leaders was that slavery’s future was far more secure within the Union where it enjoyed constitutional protection than it would be outside the Union and without that protection. They were quick to condemn abolitionists as well as southern fire-eaters for having brought about the needless crisis at hand. Brownlow wrote, “My contempt for the Abolitionists of the North is only equaled by my hatred of the Disunionists of the South.” In Philadelphia, he engaged in a much-publicized five-day debate with an abolitionist and utilized the by then sharply defined proslavery ideology to the fullest.32 And yet there were those for whom slavery’s survival was not the top priority to be considered in the debate over secession. Temple may well have spoken for more of his fellow East Tennesseans when he said just before the June 8 election: “If we had to choose between the government on one side without slavery, and a broken and dissevered government with slavery, I would say unhesitatingly, ‘Let (location 2240)

> voice comparable to Thomas Clingman’s in East Tennessee. By the same token, Unionism never enjoyed nearly as full-bodied or consistent a hearing in western North Carolina as Andrew Johnson, Parson Brownlow, and others provided in East Tennessee. This is not to say that these individuals and their differences alone determined the course their constituents and/or readers took when faced with the ominous choices before them as the nation split in two. Rather, the key to their success as popular and influential spokesmen for their fellow mountaineers lay in their ability to recognize, verbalize, and ultimately exploit preexisting insecurities, prejudices, sources of pride, and self-perceptions, which they in turn translated into appropriate and effective ideological rhetoric for the crisis at hand. A number of recent studies stress the significance of community pressures in bringing about conformity on this vital issue.40 It was indeed a major factor on both sides of the North Carolina–Tennessee border, and one that had much to do with the influence these spokesmen were able to exert in consolidating and mobilizing those they led. (location 2297)

> Yet all hope of aid from this household was not lost, for the crippled husband of this “vixen” sat on the stoop and listened passively “while his spouse was declaiming against us so virulently.” When she concluded her tirade, he winked at the men and, hobbling off the stoop, motioned for them to follow him. At a safe distance from the house, this “happy or unhappy husband,” as Drake called him, married only six weeks, confided that he sympathized with their cause. He informed them that he had served in the Confederate army until he had been wounded and discharged. Two of his brothers, also Confederates, had been captured in battle, had “taken the oath,” and were doing good business in the North. He was determined to do likewise and saw Drake and his companions as a means for his own escape. He “resolved to befriend” the fugitives and proposed guiding them across the mountains to Union lines if they would return with other forces and take him prisoner, thus allowing him to escape both impending conscription and his shrewish bride. Their conference was cut short by his wife’s appearance, which sent the fugitives scurrying on their way, abandoning the “kind-hearted but unfortunate” husband to her supervision. (location 2427)

> The star-crossed, and state line–crossing, lovers Buck Younce and Edith Carroll each adhered to the ideological stance of their parents, even though the Younce family’s Unionism and the Carrolls’ pro-Confederate stance were minority positions in their respective communities. (location 2604)

> to betray enemies. In the fullest treatment of the subject, Michael Fellman wrote of Missouri’s “inside war”: “Disintegration, demoralization, and perverse adaptation engulfed women’s behavior and self conceptions as it assaulted the family and undermined male-female and female-female . . . relationships. Like male civilians in a guerrilla war theater, women were both victims and actors.”22 (location 2643)

> of John Hunt Morgan’s officers who observed of East Tennesseans: “Did I stay long in this country, I should fear losing that respect and regard for the female sex, which I have been raised to have—here they unsex themselves, and by their conduct, lose all claim to be respected and regarded as ladies. . . . Was I in authority here, I should treat them as men.”23 (location 2649)

> and how those women, in turn, affected the war effort. In Womenfolks, her 1983 paean to her southern distaff ancestry, Shirley Abbott maintained, with tongue somewhat in cheek, that “the fortitude of upper-class southern women during the Civil War is one of the sacrosanct themes in the mythology of the region: great-granny defying those blue-coated sons-of-bitches under the portico, just after she had personally buried the silver and put down a small mutiny among the field hands. . . . The backwoods women (lacking any such melodramatic props) had little to be heroic about.”3 That view may well have reflected not only popular perceptions but also the focus of scholarly scrutiny at the time. The latter at least has changed substantially in the intervening years, thanks to significant work dealing with the ways in which southern women at all socioeconomic levels and in various parts of the Confederacy coped with the crisis.4 Even for Appalachian women, who would certainly qualify under Abbott’s categorization of those whose efforts were so unappreciated, such neglect is being remedied as historians of the region are providing new insights into the dynamics of highland home fronts from a variety of angles. (location 2807)

> Slaves often guided fugitives through the rugged and treacherous mountains as they moved through the Carolinas or north Georgia toward Knoxville. Many opened their homes to these men, sometimes hiding them for days at a time and feeding them generously. Others provided passersby with clothing, foodstuffs, or other supplies (more often than not, their masters’ property) or offered medical care if needed. To a number of fugitives, slaves’ information on the political persuasions of residents of their area was the most valuable service they offered. Slaves usually were well aware of which white residents were Unionists and therefore useful to those making inquiries, and which were not. Upon encountering a lone white Unionist, to whose mountain cabin he had been directed by helpful slaves west of Greenville, South Carolina, a Rhode Island fugitive was exasperated with “this most ignorant man I had ever met, black or white.” While the hermit expressed his willingness to help, the soldier wrote that he was too ignorant to do so and that “we could do better with the negroes” in terms of information and advice.21 (location 3544)

> As Richardson saw it, “They were always ready to help anybody opposed to the Rebels. Union refugees, Confederate deserters, escaped prisoners—all received from them the same prompt and invariable kindness. But let a Rebel soldier . . . apply to them, and he would find but cold kindness.”25 Junius Browne was more eloquent in describing black partisanship as he witnessed it: “The magic word ‘Yankee’ opened all our hearts, and elicited the loftiest virtues. They were ignorant, oppressed, enslaved; but they always cherished a simple and beautiful faith in the cause of the Union and its ultimate triumph.”26 In some cases, the slaves encountered by escaped prisoners were on the run themselves, a factor that made not only for sympathy but also for empathy on the part of some fugitive-authors. On more than one occasion, soldiers who had found shelter in slave cabins shared those tight quarters with escaped slaves, or “travelers,” as blacks called runaways.27 In some cases, slaves begged to accompany the fugitives as they moved toward Union lines and freedom. Such requests elicited mixed reactions from whites who suddenly found themselves asked to help those from whom they had received such vital assistance. (location 3580)

> A local slave who shared a cell with several Union captives paid a heavy price for his attempt to aid them. In accord with a preconceived plan of escape, this “large, powerful negro” seized the guard and held him, while his white cellmates took his keys and made their exit. Intimidated by the threats of another guard, the “cowards” retreated back to their cell. Assuming that the slave alone had instigated the attack that allowed the white prisoners to escape, the guard ordered that he be given a hundred lashes.30 (location 3611)

> More positive encounters with African Americans inspired similar abolitionist sentiments. Richardson was taken in by “a peculiarly intelligent mulatto woman” he encountered near Wilkesboro, North Carolina. After an hour’s conversation with this slave wife (who also was forced to be the mistress of her master), he concluded: “Using language with rare propriety, she impressed me as one who would willingly give up life for her unfortunate race. With culture and opportunity, she would have been an intellectual and social power in any circle.” Inspired by this and other contacts with highland blacks, Richardson extolled the race as a whole and expressed his optimism for their prospects, once emancipated: “Some one has said that it needs three generations to make a gentleman. Heaven only knows how many generations are required to make a freeman! But we have been accustomed to consider this perfect trustworthiness, this complete loyalty of friends, a distinctively Saxon trait. The very rare degree to which the negroes have manifested it, is an augury of brightest hope and promise for their future. It is a faint indication of what they may one day become, with Justice, Time, and Opportunity.”32 John Kellogg prided himself on the liberalization of his attitude toward blacks, declaring of those who had aided his escape efforts: “Those men and women who succored us in our great peril are my friends, and will be met and treated as such, wherever found, though their skins be darker, and their hair curl tighter than my own.” After extolling their generosity toward him, he avowed, “May my right hand wither and my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, when I forget to be grateful to that people, or fail to advocate their cause, when their cause is just!”33 (location 3623)

> The prison passages of these works, along with others, served as effective antisouthern propaganda; curiously, though, the post-prison sections dealt with here had little or no influence in shaping more positive perceptions of the one group of southerners they consistently portrayed in a favorable light—those in Appalachia during this very period in which a national consciousness of the region was emerging—but in very different terms. The literary and socially conscious “discovery”—or, as Allen Batteau terms it, the “invention”—of Appalachia by northerners in the late nineteenth century served “to provide American society with colorful characters for its fiction, perfect innocents for its philanthropy, and an undeveloped wilderness in which to prove its pioneering blood.”54 It took demeaning and distorted imagery to do so. By the 1870s and 1880s, just as many of the fugitive narratives were being published, other accounts were also emerging, portraying Appalachia as “a strange land and peculiar people.”55 In such accounts, southern mountaineers emerged as depraved and semi-barbaric people, notable for their moonshining, feuding, and inbreeding, as well as for their poverty and ignorance. At the same time, a more uplifting aspect of Appalachian mythmaking also was under way: the creation of “Holy Appalachia.”56 Much of the appeal to those discovering the region in the latter half of the nineteenth century was its apparent ethnic purity, its whiteness. Historian James Klotter has reasoned that rampant racism and other barriers thwarted philanthropic impulses toward southern freedmen during Reconstruction. Those impulses then were transferred to another group of southerners perceived as equally needy and perhaps more deserving—the mountaineers who were, in the words of a turn-of-the-century ethnographer, the “purest Anglo-Saxon stock in all the United States.”57 (location 3778)

> “Please tell me,” she implored Cornelia Spencer, “if it wouldn’t be just as sinful to ‘pray’ for these ‘enemies’ as for the Devil?” Over the past year, she confided, she had never dared to pray the passage of the Lord’s Prayer that reads, “Forgive me my trespasses as I forgive those who trespass against me.” “I know that I am wicked—and those wretches have made me so,” she concluded, “but I cannot be a hypocrite.”25 Even during the (location 4121)

> “We passed through an immense crowd of a few citizens, a great many privates, and insolent negroes in U.S. uniforms,” she wrote. “One of these negroes called out to my father, ‘How do you like this, old man?’ ” As a result of that incident alone, she stated, “I have loathed the uniform ever since.” (location 4202)

> Much more immediate influences on the highland depictions of “Mountain Victory” and Absalom, Absalom! were literary sources. An Irvin S. Cobb story, relating the ambush and murder of a homeward-bound Confederate veteran by Tennessee mountaineers, provided the bare bones for Faulkner’s short story. (location 4456)

> They were Emmett Gowen’s Mountain Born and Grace Lumpkin’s To Make My Bread, two recently published novels, and George Washington Harris’s 1867 classic collection of stories and sketches, Sut Lovingood, the tone of which is set by its subtitle, Yarns Spun by a “Nat’ral Born Durn’d Fool” Warped and Wove for Public Wear.19 (location 4461)

> Sut Lovingood (location 4464)

> “Men were made a-purpus jus’ to eat, drink, an’ fur stay-in’ awake in the early part of the nites: an wimen were made to cook the vittles, mix the spirits, an’ help the men do the stayin’ awake. That’s all, an’ nothin’ more, unless it’s fur the wimen to raise the devil atwix meals, an’ knot socks atwix drams, an’ the men to play short cards, swap hosses with fools, and fite fur exercise, at odd spells.”22 Faulkner seems to have extracted much of that description for his own use, but he dropped the satiric disdain in which Harris wrapped it. In his romanticized twentieth-century interpretation, mountain “innocence” is taken far more seriously and treated with considerably more respect than Harris, a native East Tennessean, could ever muster for it. (location 4471)

> Although Faulkner once stated that he “never read any history,”25 he wrote these stories in the wake of a number of historical treatments of Southern Appalachia that contributed greatly to the popular image of the region as all white. From the 1890s on, a variety of published works contributed to the dual assumptions upon which Faulkner based these two works—the absence of blacks in the mountains and the strong animosity mountain residents felt toward them. In 1897, a journalist wrote admiringly of the north Georgia mountains, “Nowhere will be found purer Anglo-Saxon blood.” In 1901, an ethnogeographer echoed these sentiments for another part of the region. Kentucky mountaineers have not only kept foreign elements at bay; they have “still more effectively . . . excluded the Negro. This region is as free of them as northern Vermont.”26 (location 4494)

> As for hostility toward blacks, East Tennessee seems to have generated more commentary than other parts of the mountain South, perhaps because of the lengthier Union occupation it endured during and after the Civil War. In a seminal and widely used document collection on Reconstruction first published in 1906, Walter Fleming included several passages illustrating the irony of the fact that the South’s most ardent Unionists were also among its most intense racists. From northern journalist J. T. Trowbridge’s observations in 1865, Fleming singled out the quote “East Tennesseans, though opposed to slavery and secession, do not like niggers.” He also drew from congressional testimony of Freedman’s Bureau officials in 1866 the statement “It is a melancholy fact that among the bitterest opponents of the Negro in Tennessee are the intensely radical loyalists of the mountain district—the men who have been in our armies.”27 Whether or not Faulkner ever read these specific passages, the same concept—that mountain Unionists could also be rabid racists—comes through so clearly in “Mountain Victory” that it seems hardly coincidental that he set his story in East Tennessee. (location 4500)

> See, for example, Richard B. Drake, “Slavery and Antislavery in Appalachia,” Appalachian Heritage 14 (Winter 1986): 25–33; John C. Inscoe, Mountain Masters: Slavery and the Sectional Crisis in Western North Carolina (Knoxville: University of Tennessee, 1989); Kenneth W. Noe, Southwest Virginia’s Railroad: Modernization and the Sectional Crisis (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1994); Robert Tracey McKenzie, “Wealth Income: The Preindustrial Structure of East Tennessee,” Appalachian Journal 21 (Spring 1994): 260–79; Mary Beth Pudup, “Social Class and Economic Development in Southeastern Kentucky, 1820–1880,” in Appalachian Frontiers: Settlement, Society, and Development in the Preindustrial Era, ed. Robert D. Mitchell (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1991), 235–60; and Martin Crawford, “Political Society in a Southern Mountain Community: Ashe County, North Carolina, 1850–1860,” Journal of Southern History 55 (August 1989): 373–90. (location 4613)

> Recent explorations of these views include Turner and Cabbell, Blacks in Appalachia, 21, 201; Drake, “Slavery and Antislavery in Appalachia”; Inscoe, Mountain Masters, chap. 5; “Race and Racism in Nineteenth-Century Appalachia” (chap. 1 in this volume); David W. Bowen, Andrew Johnson and the Negro (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1989), 15–16; Kenneth W. Noe, “Toward the Myth of Unionist Appalachia, 1865–1883,” in Journal of the Appalachian Studies Association 6 (1994): 73–80; and Durwood Dunn, An Abolitionist in the Appalachian South: Ezekiel Birdseye on Slavery, Capitalism, and Separate Statehood in East Tennessee, 1841–1846 (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1997). (location 4624)

> W. J. Cash, The Mind of the South (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1941), 219. (location 4630)

> Asheville native John Ehle’s 1971 novel (location 4643)

> His fiction, which ranges chronologically from the late eighteenth century through the post–World War II era, breaks through regional stereotypes in bold and substantive ways. According to his friend Borden Mace, one of the film’s associate producers, “John has revealed a greater truth and accuracy about Southern Appalachian life than many historians and sociologists,” an assessment with which few critics would take issue.3 (location 4646)

> Abolitionist John Brown was by no means the first to acknowledge that the mountains of western Virginia, so integral to his Harpers Ferry scheme in 1859, “were intended by the Almighty for a refuge for the slave and a defense against the oppressor.”9 A recent scholar has echoed that theme, insisting that the region “was settled to a substantial degree by slaves and indentured white servants fleeing from exploitation and angry with established practices in Colonial America. The hills, in their exquisite isolation, became havens for the disenchanted black and white, who needed to escape burdensome drudgery and slavery.”10 (location 4700)

> According to one version of this premise, “The aristocratic slaveholder from his river-bottom plantation looked with scorn on the slaveless dweller among the hills; while the highlander repaid his scorn with high disdain and even hate.”15 (location 4733)

> Carter G. Woodson’s seminal essay, “Freedom and Slavery in Appalachian America,” Journal of Negro History 1 (April 1916): 132– (location 4851)

> Robert D. Mitchell, Commercialism and Frontier: Perspectives on the Early Shenandoah Valley (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1977); Durwood Dunn, Cade’s Cove: The Life and Death of a Southern Appalachian Community, 1818–1937 (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1988); David Hsiung, Two Worlds in the Tennessee Mountains: Exploring the Origins of Appalachian Stereotypes (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1997); Paul Salstrom, Appalachia’s Path to Dependency: Rethinking a Region’s Economic History, 1730–1940 (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1994); and Wilma A. Dunaway, The First American Frontier: Transition to Capitalism in Southern Appalachia, 1700–1860 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996). (location 4859)

> 18. See, for example, Winthrop D. Jordan, White over Black: American Attitudes toward the Negro, 1550–1812 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1969); and Edward L. Ayers, Vengeance and Justice: Crime and Punishment in the Nineteenth-Century South (New York: Oxford University Press, 1984). For more succinct coverage of these issues, see Whittington B. Johnson, “Punishments,” and Robert E. May, “Violence, Slave” in Dictionary of Afro-American Slavery, ed. Randall M. Miller and John David Smith (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1988), 603–5, 776–79. (location 4883)

> Both husband and wife recalled those experiences separately in dictated statements to a daughter—Horatio in 1892 and Margaret in 1900. Together they confirm harrowing conditions that both suffered, and yet their separate voices reveal distinct, gender-linked perspectives on the same events. Horatio seemed to rally to the challenges he faced in outwitting and harassing his Confederate antagonists, and he tells of his exploits with considerable self-satisfaction. Margaret, on the other hand, while always supportive of her husband, never took any joy or pride in enduring these burdens, which apparently left her more emotionally and physically drained than Horatio.13 (location 6209)

> One of the most unusual of such efforts was undertaken by a local historian, Elihu J. Sutherland in the Sandy Basin of southwestern Virginia, a community very much like Ashe County’s North Fork. In the 1920s and beyond, he conducted oral interviews with more than a hundred fellow residents in an attempt to construct family histories and, through them, a “folk history” of the community, with the Civil War a central focus of the interviewees’ own memories or those of their parents and grandparents. More recently, historian Ralph Mann has used that exceptional collection of remembrances to reveal a great deal about the nature of Appalachia’s guerrilla warfare and the ways in which it shaped and was shaped by kinship networks, gender roles, and community dynamics.18 (location 6235)

> All of these accounts lead us back to William Albert Wilson and his version of this mountain war. (location 6250)

> His testimonial ranks among the most meticulous and comprehensive we have of the many households, neighborhoods, and kinship networks for an Appalachian, even a southern, populace. What emerges from his narrative is a full-blown portrait of this most divided area of Ashe County, a community wracked by violence and destruction inflicted both from within and without, and of the multiple forces that drove an otherwise peaceful people to such extremes of hatred, cruelty, and vindictiveness. (location 6255)

> On the other hand, probably no county in what was once the Confederate South has as sophisticated, as comprehensive, and as insightful a history of its Civil War era as does Ashe County, thanks to the work of British historian Martin Crawford, whose book, Ashe County’s Civil War, appeared in 2001. (location 6485)

> 18. Ralph Mann, “Family Group, Family Migration, and the Civil War in the Sandy Basin of Virginia,” Appalachian Journal 19 (Summer 1992): 374–93; and “Guerrilla Warfare and Gender Roles: Sandy Basin, Virginia as a Test Case,” Journal of the Appalachian Studies Association 5 (1993): 59–66. (location 6606)

>
