# Caste, Gender, and Christianity in Colonial India: Telugu Women in Mission (Postcolonialism and Religions)
by James Elisha Taneti

_(Last annotated on June 29, 2014)_

> A CONVOLUTED CULTURAL WEB The field of action is the coastal belt on the Bay of Bengal, which the British administrators christened as the Northern Circars. This territory was also identified as “ceded districts” in the British imperial records. The British East India Company claimed territorial control over the region after Shah Alam II, the eighteenth emperor in the Mughal dynasty, “ceded” it in 1765. The newly crowned but beleaguered emperor granted the British control over the region after his losses to the former at the battle at Buxar. The nizam of Hyderabad, who was in direct political control over the land, grudgingly conceded his rights the following year. The British East India Company, a trading agency, gradually consolidated political control, military supremacy, and market monopoly over this coastal belt, which included the present-day districts of Srikakulam, Vizianagaram, Visakhapatnam, East Godavari, West Godavari, Krishna, and Guntur. After quelling the resistance of the native troops in the Sepoy Mutiny7 of 1857, the British Parliament inherited the Circars from the company. Control of the subcontinent was no longer corporate. The British collected revenues, regulated the market, introduced a penal code, and even installed a judicial system. They maintained a strong army, enforcing law and order, safeguarding their political and market interests, and aiding the local sovereigns in their rivalries.8 The imposition of pax Britannica, by and large, was complete by the end of the nineteenth century, claimed a missionary observer.9 (location 229)

> Colonial officials with evangelical convictions sheltered and encouraged Protestant missionaries, whose arrivals dramatically surged after the mutiny. (location 259)

> Missionary reporters often ignored the contributions of native women to the Christianization of the Telugus. Usually, they did not perceive their encounters with Dalit women worth reporting. This was consistent with a general missionary tendency to celebrate their encounters with men of “higher castes.” Women missionaries, including Emma Rauschenbusch-Clough, a self-professed feminist and an American Baptist, were no exception to this. (location 321)

> Instead of naming the person, however, writers often referred to them as “my Biblewoman.” (location 329)

> In the process, I found the proposal of sociologist James C. Scott very helpful. In his book, Weapons of the Weak, Scott suggests that everyday forms of resistance provide crucial clues in studying the stories of the weak.22 According to him, social resistance manifests itself in everyday forms of resistance like feigned ignorance, rumors, proverbs, folklore, off-stage comments, and rituals.23 Repeated gestures and informal practices provide clues for the study of the processes of conflict and collaboration that occur daily between an employer and the employed or the dominator and the dominated.24 A curry with less salt, as a Telugu proverb suggests, can be a form of protest by a chef. In the context of my study, a married woman in a white saree is not an accident. Such gestures are capable of conveying what several tons of written pages cannot. (location 359)

> Given my location in history and my gender, I am an outsider to the story as well. Born a male and in a family that had been Christian for the last two generations, my experiences differ from those of the Biblewomen. My encounters with the caste system and strategies for how to deal with it as a Dalit born in a Sudhra neighborhood vary from the women in this study, who were born in Dalit hamlets but crossed territorial restrictions when caste boundaries were more pronounced. I, therefore, constantly reminded myself of the historical contingencies that formed me. I attempted to subject myself to the same hermeneutics of suspicion that I applied to the data I read or the voices I heard in these texts. (location 372)

> With the native men taking over the “national” church, the office of Biblewoman began to eclipse after 1947. (location 384)

> This chapter briefly surveys the spread of Christianity in the region and then analyzes the beginnings of the profession in the London slums. In this chapter, I argue that the roots of the profession were neither completely alien nor entirely indigenous. (location 387)

> GENDER AND CHRISTIAN MISSION R. Pierce Beaver, a church historian, initiated an academic conversation about women in Christian missions through his pioneering book, All Loves Excelling, which was first published in 1968.26 His study examined the participation of American women in foreign missions as a mass movement. A decade later, Beaver published a second edition of this book with a different title, with an additional chapter on the participation of women in world mission in the 1970s.27 The foundation Beaver laid soon came to maturation in the mid-1980s with the writings of Dana Robert,28 Jane Hunter,29 and Patricia Hill.30 These feminist historians considered the role gender played in perceptions and practices of Christian mission, focusing on foreign women missionaries from the North Atlantic region. They locate the perceptions and practices of these missionaries in the social context of the North Atlantic world, especially in the emerging feminist consciousness of the nineteenth century. The religious context of early nineteenth-century America, which was shaped by Enlightenment leanings and Evangelical Revivals, provided a broader context for the movement. (location 411)

> The spirit of self-denial thus has been an integral part of their missionary practice.37 American women wanted to be “useful” for Christ and hence made sacrifices sometimes at the cost of their own interest. Amanda Porterfield, who examined the missionary interests of alumni from the Mount Holyoke Female Seminary in the nineteenth century, concurs with Dana Robert about the spirit of self-denial broadly expressed among American women missionaries.38 (location 444)

> EMPIRE, RACE, AND CHRISTIAN MISSION A number of writers who trace their intellectual lineage to Edward Said and locate the production of cultural knowledge in the colonial context have contributed to the study of women and mission.41 Borrowing methodological tools from the field of English literature, they highlight how empire and race shaped gender ideologies and relationships during the colonial era. For example, Gauri Viswanathan, in her book Masks of Conquest, a study of the dynamics of cultural domination and colonialism in the institution, practice, and ideology of English studies, argues that the teaching of English conferred power to the British in the Indian subcontinent and fortified it.42 She acknowledges the agency of the native, who received, resisted, imbibed, and appropriated the ideological content offered to him or her.43 She reminds us to historicize the interaction between British and Indian communities within the context of colonialism.44 (location 458)

> Indian historian Maina Singh, on the other hand, warns her postcolonial feminist colleagues against constructing a “singular white other.”55 She refuses to confuse women missionaries with memsahibs, meaning wives of colonial officials. Race and empire may have factored in the interaction between women missionaries and native women. But the relationships of missionaries with native women were not always identical to those between memsahibs and women in the colonies.56 Singh reminds us that mission compounds, with their easy accessibility to the natives, sometimes disturbed the colonial spatial arrangements. Moreover, even while furthering colonial objectives, the educational and health institutions founded by the missionaries could compete with colonial institutions.57 (location 493)

> They focused on the native Christian women but mostly of the socially elite, such as Pandita Ramabai, a Christian of Brahmin descent. (location 523)

> In this volume, I argue that the colonial backdrop of modern Christian missionaries—native and foreign—shaped their paradigms and practices of mission. I agree that colonial rule disrupted the cultural norms and disturbed the social balance, unconsciously creating a milieu conducive for “social engineering,” a process through which groups within a community disrupt, subvert, and reconstruct their nomos or social world.65 While admitting that empire and race were influential in all that happened during the colonial era, I also argue that the social interests of various native groups in the colonies were equally responsible. (location 524)

> CASTE AND CHRISTIAN MISSIONS Some social historians, such as John Webster,66 Dick Kooiman,67 Geoffrey Oddie,68 and J. W. Gladstone,69 studying the history of Christianity in India, have considered how the social aspirations of the marginalized, especially the victims of the caste system, influenced group conversions of Dalits to Christianity. Writing almost five decades after the publication of Jarrell W. Pickett’s findings, they agree with Pickett and his team that the social structures of the Indian subcontinent largely determined the mode of conversions. The commission instituted by the National Christian Council of India and headed by Jarrell W. Pickett earlier analyzed the social basis of the Dalit conversions to Christianity and rightly characterized them as community conversions. While analyzing the social factors responsible for the mass conversions, the group identified “all sorts of motives” including social interests of the convert groups.70 Following Pickett, these social historians analyze the social aspirations of the converts and the impact of conversion on their status. They depart from Pickett in highlighting the agency of the converts. They view missionaries as those who provided the context for the marginalized groups in their social struggles for dignity and equality. Unlike Pickett, who concluded that the decisions of the chieftains resulted in the mass conversions of Dalit communities, they argue that Dalits converted as small groups and clusters of families at separate times.71 However, these historians did not pay due attention to the role gender played in how women responded to and appropriated Christianity. (location 530)

> In her introduction to the book Gender and Caste, Anupama Rao challenges the tendency of many feminists to create a singular Indian woman. (location 549)

> Uma Chakravarti also advises us to consider caste and gender together in studying experiences of Indian women.73 (location 551)

> While the caste system controls modes of production, endogamy regulates reproductive activities.74 (location 554)

> STUDIES ABOUT BIBLEWOMEN Beginnings have been made in the study of Biblewomen. An early essay by mission historian Ruth Tucker focused attention on the contributions of Biblewomen to the modern missionary movement.79 More than a decade later, Jane Haggis and Eliza Kent have studied two groups of Tamil Biblewomen. Haggis examined the contradiction between missionary expectations and results of professionalization of the office of Biblewoman.80 According to her, Tamil Biblewomen who associated (location 564)

> Biblewomen in north India with the LMS and Scottish Presbyterian missions in the last decades of the nineteenth century, Rhonda Semple focuses on the inequalities based on race within the missionary movement.85 She argues that adopting race was a social marker through which missionaries sought respect within their communities at home for the missionary profession.86 (location 584)

> In a case study of Sitshokupi Sibanda, a Biblewoman in colonial Zimbabwe in the first half of the twentieth century, Wendy Urban-Mead examines the complex negotiation that took place between a male-dominated mission church that indirectly accommodated the mission activism of women and an African woman who incorporated missionary practices as part of her spirituality.87 Urban-Mead describes the ways Sibanda mediated between the worldview of her missionary employers and that her of Mwali culture. (location 588)

> As part of her doctoral research, Ellen Xiang-Yu Cai is evaluating how joining the profession contributed to the social mobility of Chinese Biblewomen, especially in the last three decades of the nineteenth century.90 (location 599)

> I am indebted to the tools that postcolonial historians have introduced. Like many of my colleagues, I acknowledge that the colonial context of the nineteenth century impacted missionary agendas and disrupted local cultures. But the tale of Telugu Biblewomen does not fit into the “nationalist” postcolonial narratives that characterize native catalysts of change—religious and social—as local surrogates of foreign intruders, whether a Western missionary or a European colonizer. For example, Jayawardena argues that Pandita Ramabai lost an opportunity to emerge truly national by converting to Christianity.93 According to Jayawardena, Ramabai deprived herself an opportunity to lead her nation against the colonial rule through her affiliation with the religion of the colonizers. I deliberately resist the temptation to create a singular nation within colonial India.94 Nor do I view converts to Christianity, the religion of the colonizers, as alien. Acknowledging pluralities of nations within the subcontinent, I argue that some native women appropriated theological resources in the Christian faith and colonial environment in their struggles against the gender- and caste-based oppressions in the local cultures. Both the roots of their discontent and the modus operandi of their struggles were local. They were as national as their sisters in other religions who did not choose to convert. (location 625)

> In this volume, I have frequently and unabashedly used the category Dalit in reference to those ethnic groups that were outside the four-tiered Hindu society. In the context of coastal Andhra, this term refers mostly to Malas and Madigas. Baindlas, Jangams, Poturajus, Mashti, Dandems, Bandelas, Sindhollu, Dekkali, Mattitolu, and Madiga Bogam are other Dalit communities in the region. Nomenclature to writers is what surgical tools are to a surgeon. I admit the problems in the use of the term Dalit to Malas and Madigas. These communities seldom viewed themselves as kin groups although the dominant castes have identified them together as avarnas (ones without color, category, or class), chandalas (filthy ones) and panchamas (the fifth castes). They do not see each other as parts of a larger grouping despite sharing experiences of subjugation and cultures of resistance.95 Rivalry, suspicion, and hostility characterize the relationship between the two communities. (location 641)

> With no courage to name themselves or their group, both Malas and Madigas often referred to themselves as banchas (slaves) in their encounters with “caste” men and women. (location 649)

> An example of three associated deities illustrates the roles Dalit religiosity assigned to female deities. The goddess Ellamma was believed to be the common force behind all creation.26 Devotees recognized her presence in all that is living. Ellamma was believed to be present in all the tongues that speak and to be revealed in fire and flames (at the time of burnt offering). Her associate Matangi was much more imminent than Ellamma. All communities, including Brahmins, worshipped her although Madigas claim monopoly over her. She was believed to be responsible for protecting communities from drought and disease. While Ellamma and Matangi represented the creative and governing aspects of nature, Pothuraj, the bloodthirsty male deity in this trio, was believed to be the beneficiary of sacrifices.27 Thus, while female deities dominated the Dalit pantheon, their male counterparts could play subsidiary roles to the goddesses. In terms of performance, both men and women participated in the cultic leadership and needed these Dalit traditions. The practices and beliefs varied in different locales but there were some shared characteristics. Pambalas (Mala) and Asadis (Madiga) men functioned as transmitters of cosmologies through storytelling.28 They also conducted (location 747)

> Dalit women also served as priests but their roles differed from those of their male counterparts.32 They represented the presence or voice of the deity. For example, named after the goddess Matangi, a Madiga woman was considered to be an incarnation of Matangi.33 Consecrated in childhood as a priestess after a careful examination, this human Matangi represented the goddess in all public religious activities.34 Despite her “defiling” Madiga origins, she presided at the purificatory ceremonies that preceded all village feasts and festivals.35 On appointed seasons in a year, she led ritual processions, visiting every lane in the village and entering caste houses at her will. During her march, she abused caste landlords and spat on them, a gesture that the social elite considered to be purifying. (location 760)

>
