# The Sword of the Lord: The Roots of Fundamentalism in an American Family
by Andrew Himes

_(Last annotated on March 18, 2014)_

> — Parker J. Palmer (author of Healing the Heart of Democracy, A Hidden Wholeness, Let Your Life Speak, and The Courage to Teach) (location 180)

> Granddad locked horns with the local religious establishment over his criticism of the Southern Baptist Convention and its “compromises” with liberalism and modernism, and then helped lead an exodus of fundamentalists from the Southern Baptist denomination in Texas. (location 230)

> He wrote and published over 200 books and pamphlets during his lifetime with a combined circulation of over 60 million copies, with such provocative titles as All Satan’s Apples Have Worms; Predestined for Hell?; Bobbed Hair, Bossy Wives, and Women Preachers; The Dance: Child of the Brothel, Sister of Gambling and Drunkenness, Mother of Lust—Road to Hell!; Bible Facts About Heaven; The Home; and Is God A Dirty Bully? Famously, he wrote a small pamphlet titled What Must I Do to Be Saved? that was published in over 30 languages with over 40 million copies distributed. (location 233)

Note: like what is to be done

> Granddad mentored and encouraged hundreds or thousands of other and younger fundamentalist and evangelical leaders such as Billy Graham, Jerry Falwell, Bob Jones Jr., and W. A. Criswell, a fellow Texan who became the most prominent Southern Baptist of his generation and helped lead the Southern Baptist Convention’s return to its fundamentalist roots in the last third of the 20th Century. (location 240)

> I’m interested instead in what came before the accession to power of the modern Religious Right. In particular, I started this book to understand the specific history that created the fundamentalist world in which I grew up. Who were my ancestors, including my grandfather? Why did they believe as they did? How did their religious ideas grow from the soil of their lives and condition their actions? (location 252)

> This book is not intended to be an exposé of fundamentalism or a polemic against fundamentalism. It is important to me to try my best to explore the truth about my family, our faith, and our history over the generations. So I have approached this task with humility and all the compassion I can muster. I am grateful to my fundamentalist family for instilling in me a profound love for others, high moral standards, and a deep commitment to justice. (location 260)

> The women in my family never cut their hair and always wore skirts or dresses, never pants or shorts. The children in my family never said gee or golly for fear of using the name of the Lord in vain, even in a disguised form. We never attended movies at the local theater because we didn’t want to support the “Hollywood cesspool.” We made sure never to go dancing because we knew that dancing leads to sex before marriage and sex without marriage leads to depravity and Hell. We never played card games with a deck of regular playing cards, which we understood had been invented by a crazy, evil Spanish prince named Charles, who designed the deck to portray God the Father who had sex with Mary the Mother who gave birth to an illegitimate Son named Jesus who was also the Jack of Spades. We children called adult men “Sir” and adult women “Ma’am.” We carried Bibles around to lots of places that normal people wouldn’t be seen with them and we passed out Bible tracts on street corners and put leaflets for Vacation Bible School under the windshield wipers of thousands of cars. A fundamentalist was set apart from “the world.” We were definitely going to Heaven when we died, and those with different views on Heaven, Hell, God and Satan, sin and salvation were definitely going to Hell, which was more than a shame because Hell involved eternal torment, literal flames, and wailing and gnashing of teeth. (location 391)

> My aunts were all gorgeous, and my uncles were all funny and smart, and my cousins and siblings, generally speaking, were sweet, adventurous, decent human beings who were fun to play with. I loved going to church on Sunday mornings, and I loved going over to my grandparents’ house after church for a big family dinner every Sunday afternoon, after which we played some non-sinful game such as Carroms, Monopoly, Rook, or Dominoes. Within my family, everything was easy. It was only when we interacted with others outside our circle that I noticed the complexity of the world. (location 458)

> I can identify several specific ways in which my training as a fundamentalist bore good and healthy fruit, though I’m aware that a statement like that may be greeted with some skepticism by those who have only witnessed the world of fundamentalism from the outside. As a fundamentalist, I learned that it was perfectly all right for me to have an idea or outlook different from most folks, and to struggle for what I believed in the face of determined opposition. I learned that it was acceptable to be passionate about my values, and to care deeply about the consequences of my actions. I learned to view myself as an imperfect human who needs help from outside myself. I learned that faith and community are essential to life. (location 463)

> Search for the “fundamentalist” label anywhere on any of these websites. You’ll find references to the use of the word fundamentalist from 10, 15 or 100 years in the past, but no contemporary usage. John R. Rice’s friend Jerry Falwell was the leading fundamentalist in America in the decades after Granddad’s death in 1980, and in 1981 Falwell published a book titled The Fundamentalist Phenomenon, which proclaimed the political and moral triumph of the movement. Today, however, search the website of Liberty Journal, the online publication of Jerry Falwell’s Liberty University, and you get the following result:   Your search - fundamentalist - did not match any documents. No pages were found containing "fundamentalist". Suggestions: Make sure all words are spelled correctly. Try different keywords. Try more general keywords.   Mark Driscoll is the prominent pastor of Mars Hill Church in a neighborhood near my home in Seattle. I’ve attended Driscoll’s church several times to listen to his preaching and get a clear sense of his theology, which is identical in almost every respect with older fundamentalists such as John R. Rice, although he adds a twist of Calvinism (his belief that some people are simply doomed to Hell and others are elected by God and destined for Heaven). (location 488)

> "Fundamentalism is really losing the war,” Driscoll said in an interview with Christianity Today, “and I think it is in part responsible for the rise of what we know as the more liberal end of the emerging church. Because a lot of what is fueling the left end of the emerging church is fatigue with hardcore fundamentalism that throws rocks at culture. But culture is the house that people live in, and it just seems really mean to keep throwing rocks at somebody's house."[4] (location 511)

Note: smart!

> Hearing terrorism equated with fundamentalism a few times is enough to make you want to avoid the label of fundamentalism altogether. (location 523)

> The basic doctrines and assumptions of fundamentalism, nonetheless, have influenced American history for over two centuries, and fundamentalist politics and religion have dramatically shaped American foreign policy and social policy for decades. Christian fundamentalism in America has its roots in the history of the South after the end of the Civil War. The underlying attitudes and assumptions leading to modern fundamentalism grew and flourished amid the wreckage of the war and reconstruction and as a response to the trauma of that war. They were nourished by the end of slavery and by the soil of poverty and defeat. They took root especially in the deepest South and particularly in the state of Texas during the first three decades of the 20th century, as my grandfather was beginning his ministry. (location 525)

> century. It is striking, however, that those doctrines deemed “fundamental” did not include such core Christian doctrines as the Triune nature of God. They did not include the doctrine of salvation by faith through grace (the heart of the Protestant Reformation). And they included nothing from the revolutionary teachings of Jesus during his earthly ministry. It is evident that the selection of “The Fundamentals” a century ago was time-bound, driven by the specific terms of a battle over doctrine fought by two groups of people bitterly opposed to each other. But what happens to fundamentalism when its original enemies have succumbed to the passage of time or have been replaced by new opponents and the specific terms of the debate of a century ago become irrelevant? How does fundamentalism remain relevant in a world of evidently breathtaking diversity—an array of different spiritual practices, philosophies, and explorations of the meaning of God and spirit—none of which can seemingly claim to be authoritative? What does fundamentalism evolve into when the children of fundamentalists turn out to be more interested in following Jesus and practicing Christian love than arguing over arcane points of doctrine? (location 555)

> “Death waits for you. There is now a Mortal and Contagious Disease in many houses; the Sword of the Lord is Drawn, and young men fall down apace slain under it…God will ere long pour down the Cataracts of His Wrath upon a sinful Nation, which hath of late been found guilty before the Lord of Signal Apostasy, Debauchery, and above all of nefandrous Contempt of the Pure and Powerful Dispensation of the Gospel.”—Increase Mather, sermon preached in Boston, Massachusetts in 1668 during an epidemic of smallpox[6] (location 570)

> In 1741 Edwards preached a sermon titled “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God,” which may have been the most terrifying hellfire-and-brimstone sermon ever delivered:   Natural men are held in the hand of God, over the pit of Hell; they have deserved the fiery pit, and are already sentenced to it; and God is dreadfully provoked… the devil is waiting for them, Hell is gaping for them, the flames gather and flash about them, and would fain lay hold on them, and swallow them up; the fire pent up in their own hearts is struggling to break out: and they have no interest in any Mediator, there are no means within reach that can be any security to them. (location 702)

> Devil. The rights recognized in the Constitution and approved by God included the right for citizens to worship as they chose, free from the dictates of their government or their neighbors. Those who opposed the will of God were clearly the enemies of God. The children of the English Puritans in the North and the children of the Scots-Irish Presbyterians in the South found common ground in the struggle to create a new democratic republic and oppose a monarchy that was working at cross-purposes to the evident will of God. The roots of 20th century American fundamentalism can be discerned in the confluence of these two streams of immigration, culture, and history. A unique American expression of evangelical Christianity emerged—profoundly democratic, anti-royalist and anti-clerical, militant and missional, convinced that God was naturally on the side of Americans. Any who disagreed (location 845)

> New Jersey, and I sat on the couch in our living room watching every minute of the drama on our little black-and-white TV. A lone black woman testified before the Credentials Committee. Her name was Fannie Lou Hamer, and she was a sharecropper from Sunflower County, Mississippi. She stared down those white men until they hushed up and turned toward her and quieted so they could hear what she had the nerve to say. Hamer told of being arrested for trying to register to vote, and what happened when they carried her to jail. She said,   “They left my cell and it wasn't too long before they came back. He said, ‘You are from Ruleville all right,’ and he used a curse word. And he said, ‘We are going to make you wish you was dead.’ I was carried out of that cell into another cell where they had two Negro prisoners. The State Highway Patrolmen ordered the first Negro to take the blackjack…I laid on my face and the first Negro began to beat. I was beat by the first Negro until he was exhausted. I was holding my hands behind me at that time on my left side, because I suffered from polio when I was six years old…The second Negro began to beat and I began to work my feet, and the State Highway Patrolman ordered the first Negro who had beat me to sit on my feet—to keep me from working my feet. I began to scream and one white man got up and began to beat me in my head and tell me to hush. One white man—my dress had worked up high—he walked over and pulled my dress—I pulled (location 1059)

> Brown would have hurled the argument of religion in Rice’s face, curling his lips and wrinkling his nose with distaste at being in the presence of a hated slaveholder. He would have narrowed his eyes and thrust his bearded chin forward as he said something along the lines of: “The stench of your sin offends the Almighty, and if it is deemed necessary that I should forfeit my life for the furtherance of the ends of justice, and mingle my blood further with the blood of my children and with the blood of millions in this slave country whose rights are disregarded by wicked, cruel, and unjust enactments—I will submit.”[20] I imagine Rice spitting into the dust at his feet and regarding Brown with contempt, as he replied: “You say that you do the will of God by seeking to foment disobedience and rebellion and to steal my property, but I tell you that God himself ordained that some should be slaves and others should be masters, and you will bring his holy wrath down upon your head if you persist in this abolitionist heresy!”[††] Brown would have looked with silent contempt on the slave owner, as the movers moved on, the wagons loaded with men, women and children, their beds creaking and wheels rattling as they carried their cargo toward an uncertain future. In fact, Brown and his family arrived in Kansas in the fall of 1855 to set up his homestead on Osawatomie Creek, 87 miles (location 1219)

> The Civil War was a theological crisis as much as it was an economic or political crisis. Although harboring conflicting notions of God and the devil, Heaven and Hell, justice, righteousness, eternity, and the nature of humankind, all parties to the war grew up within the theological confines of American evangelicalism. Historian Perry Miller called attention to the “unity amid diversity which sustained the majority of American Protestants” before the war, and which also “makes the Civil War the more poignant, for it was fought, not by Puritans against Cavaliers nor by republicans against royalists, but among the rank and file, all children of the Revival.”[22] The Second Great Awakening that had roused America in the early decades of the 19th century had transformed both the churches as religious institutions and the shape of political discourse in America. In his book, The Civil War as a Theological Crisis, Mark Noll points out that   It was religion, narrowly considered, that drove an unprecedented ecclesiastical expansion—from about 700 Methodist churches in 1790 to nearly 20,000 in 1860; from fewer than 900 Baptist churches to more than 12,000; from no Cambellite or Restorationist or Disciples churches to over 2,000; from about 700 Presbyterian churches to well over 6,000. In the helter-skelter of the new nation’s experience, messages from the churches made sense. Preeminently from evangelical churches…came persuasive accounts of God, the human condition, and the means for finding reconciliation with God and neighbor.[23]   The nation’s politics were embedded in a characteristically American and evangelical view of theology—a view that assumed the Bible to be the source of all truth and divine wisdom, that God took a direct and personal interest in the political struggles of Americans, that God’s plan was to punish the wicked and elevate the righteous. Noll summed up that “the story of theology in the Civil War was a story of how a deeply entrenched intellectual synthesis divided against itself, even as its proponents were reassuring combatants on either side that each enjoyed a unique standing before God and each exercised a unique role as the true bearer of the nation’s Christian civilization.”[24] Southerners viewed (location 1314)

> John Stuart Mill was disappointed in his expectation of the impending demise of premillennialism. Far from disappearing, premillennialism and its “wicked” notion of God—in the conception of John R. Rice, God both as a loving Father and as a stern judge who provided eternal punishment for sin—furnished the essence of fundamentalist theology in the 20th century. In recent times it was enshrined in millions of copies of books published as part of the Left Behind series by Tim Lahaye and his co-authors, and informed the feverish imaginings of fundamentalist Pat Robertson when he proposed that the deaths of 250,000 earthquake victims in Haiti in the winter of 2010 were God’s punishment for a presumed (location 2530)

> battle to define the nature of God. Was God an angry God who condemned his own creation and was willing to see the vast majority of humanity suffer the torments of the damned for all eternity? Or was God a God of love and mercy who dreamed of a world ruled by compassion and justice? For many premillennialists, God was both an angry God and a God of love, a God intolerant of sin and eager to forgive. They believed Christians should be concerned both with social reform on earth and the fate of one’s soul in the afterlife. For the most extreme premillennialists, however, no other problem on earth truly mattered compared to saving souls from a literal and eternal hell—not poverty, injustice, hunger, inequality, ignorance, disease, slavery, or war. None of these weighed as much in the scales of eternity as the welfare of the soul and its relationship to God. Those who proclaimed the Kingdom of Heaven on earth were infidels and heretics at best, and agents of the Devil at worst. In this debate over the nature of the Millennium—a golden age of peace and prosperity in which Christian principles will prevail, or a literal reign of Christ following seven years of horrible global suffering and massive bloodshed—lay the seeds of a Great Schism, the divide between fundamentalist and mainline churches that would dominate Protestant America in the 20th century. (location 2541)

> However, many of the Baptists in attendance were impressed with Hitler’s conservative politics and crusades for “social morality.” After his return to the U.S. from Berlin, Boston’s John Bradbury said: “It was a great relief to be in a country where salacious sex literature cannot be sold, where putrid motion pictures and gangster films cannot be shown. The new Germany has burned great masses of corrupting books and magazines along with its bonfires of Jewish and communistic libraries.” And the Fifth Baptist World Congress itself pronounced that “Chancellor Hitler gives to the temperance movement the prestige of his personal example since he neither uses intoxicants nor smokes.”[134] M. E. Dodd, president of the Southern Baptist Convention, expressed his belief that Hitler’s moves against German Jews were unfortunately necessary because they had used their strengths “for self-aggrandizement to the injury of the German people,” and he charged that “since the war some 200,000 Jews from Russia and other Eastern places had come to Germany. Most of these were Communist agitators against the government.” J. Frank Norris, in this regard typical of most fundamentalists and conservatives, went through a dramatic evolution in his views of Hitler, from early support to profound hostility later on. In 1937, for example, Norris wrote in his newspaper The Fundamentalist that Germany had improved since the Great War. Earlier he had witnessed despair; however, now “as you move around among the people they are happy, they are not in fear.” He claimed there was no unemployment and that even a Jewish store owner told him business was good. “Keep your eye on that forty-seven-year-old bachelor,” said Norris after attending a Nazi demonstration. “He is a teetotaler, a vegetarian, drinks nothing but milk. He is a veritable dynamo. He is Napoleonic in his personality and influence over the masses.”[135] In the same year, however, Norris had already begun to condemn Hitler for his persecution of the Jews, and by Pearl Harbor Norris viewed Hitler as a potential Antichrist, harbinger of the end of history and evidence of the near-term Second Coming of Christ.[136] (location 4429)

> Handford remembered a process of profound change in his church. “Our bus ministry jumped. One Sunday morning one of our Sunday school bus drivers phoned and said, ‘When we arrived at the pick-up point in a housing development, there were five black children waiting along with the others. What should I do?’ This was not a question I could give my people the opportunity to decide. I do not believe we ought to give an opportunity to vote when it is a clear, important, Biblical and moral matter. ‘Bring them along. We are not going to send missionaries to Africa and refuse to reach blacks in Greenville.’ Soon the bus attendance became largely black.” (location 5591)

> Granddad referred directly to me in a national radio address:   I know a young man from a pastor’s home, a young man of great brilliance, well-raised. But he went to Wisconsin University (sic). They taught him to become a follower of Karl Marx. And, although he said he did not believe in violent communism, yet he became a Marxist and said so. And all the energy and ambitions and ideals and dreams seemed to have fled away. He became a dropout and unsure and uncertain, with no plans for the future, and the ruin of all a godly mother and father had hoped for in that godly home.”[199] (location 5678)

> I know a family where, among four children, the older boy was always given preference. He was Momma’s pride and joy…He is the only one of the family who is not a good Christian. He early sought liberal friends, espoused the doctrines of Karl Marx. What I saw long ago and foretold has come to pass. A child who is not punished for his sin and not held accountable as he ought to be is likely to go wrong.[200] (location 5689)

> As the terms of the debate became better known to the fundamentalist rank and file, the consequences of the split were radically different for Rice compared with his split with Billy Graham 13 years earlier. This time, Rice appeared to be fighting for a more “moderate” or mainstream fundamentalism, compared with an extreme position held by Bob Jones Jr. And the results of the split were all positive. Within the next three years, the circulation of The Sword of the Lord doubled, hitting almost 300,000. The fundamentalist movement went into hyper drive. Sword of the Lord conferences on soul-winning and revival were suddenly sold out, and demand was rapidly rising for more conferences, more books, more literature, more training classes. (location 5895)

> John R. Rice, however, used the phrase to encourage fundamentalists to leave behind the bitter internecine warfare that had erupted between himself and Bob Jones Jr. He gave examples of various people with whom he disagreed about some point of Christian doctrine or practice, and then said he thought Jesus wanted him to love them anyway. “God, give us hearts of compassion,” wrote Rice. “Oh, some of us think we are so strong. Then let the strong bear the burden of the weak. Some of us think we are so wise and good! But God has chosen the weak things to confound the mighty. God loves the poor, the ignorant, and the lowly. How happy is the man who thinks not of himself but of others!”[207] (location 5941)

> “Not bad for a man of my size, age, weight, disposition, doctrinal position and previous condition of servitude!” As conditions dictated, he varied his answer. When his doctor once asked him how he was, he answered, “Pretty good, for a man of my size, age, weight and disposition. Mother (his wife, Lloys Rice) says I can change my disposition!” (location 6086)

> After my Gram’s funeral, I began to wonder, What would my life be like if I started trying to show other people the same unconditional love she showed me? What if I acted that way toward my family members, my daughter, my friends? What if I acted that way toward fellow employees, toward neighbors, toward total strangers? I began a series of experiments to transform my relationships with everybody in my life. The idea of God was way too big for me to consider at the time, so I set out to embody Gram’s love in my life. (location 6314)

> Likewise, Bob Jones University, long known as the last major Southern educational institution holding onto the old Southern tradition of racial segregation, at last apologized in 2008 for its past defense of racist policies and attitudes:   For almost two centuries American Christianity, including BJU in its early stages, was characterized by the segregationist ethos of American culture…we failed to accurately represent the Lord and to fulfill the commandment to love others as ourselves. Though no known antagonism toward minorities or expressions of racism on a personal level have ever been tolerated on our campus, we allowed institutional policies to remain in place that were racially hurtful.[223] (location 6399)

> although 75 percent of all young people call themselves Christian, and about half say religion is important in their lives, the vast majority are “incredibly inarticulate about their faith, their religious beliefs and practices, and its meaning or place in their lives.” When the survey asked for details, many of the young people backed away from the conversation or described views that their own churches viewed as heretical. (location 6413)

>
