# The Roots of Southern Populism: Yeoman Farmers and the Transformation of the Georgia Upcountry, 1850-1890
by Steven Hahn

_(Last annotated on July 31, 2014)_

> The ideas embodied strains of a preindustrial republicanism-still vital in the i88os and 18gos-which linked freedom and independence with control over productive resources and portrayed the state as defender of the public good, (location 92)

> With no vestiges of a feudal past to dismantle, most historians argue, capitalism encountered only technological barriers; the formation ofa national economic system hinged solely on the advance of transportation networks, the accumulation of financial and material resources, and the advent of labor-saving machinery. Whether emphasizing consensus or conflict as the central theme of our history, these historians take a capitalist framework as their starting point.'  (location 97)

> If they shipped more than a few goods to market, the goods normally represented "surpluses."9 And although westward migration encouraged commercial and speculative impulses, it also led to the reproduction of these communities in new settings, giving shape to emerging political alignments. During the Jacksonian period, for example, hard-money Democrats attracted their greatest support in areas that resisted full absorption into the market economy.10 The South presents perhaps the most compelling case of social formations diverging from the capitalist mold. Without question, cotton production decisively linked the region to national and world markets and fueled the burgeoning industrial revolution in the North and in Europe. Yet the staple owed its vitality to slave, not free, labor and its soil was ruled by an elite increasingly scornful of bourgeois relations and values. Furthermore, the South itself saw the growth of dual societies: alongside the commercialized Plantation Belt arose areas characterized by small farms, relatively few slaves, and diversified agriculture." Comprising hilly terrain, sandy soil, or pine-flats, these nonplantation districts remained on the periphery of the export economy until the Civil War. Thereafter, they were swept into the cotton kingdom. Economic dislocations, changing social relations, and spiraling tenancy accompanied the shift. And here Populism would plant its firmest foothold.  (location 104)

> The important role of yeoman-dominated areas in the Populist revolt is, by now, quite well established, but historians have been accustomed to explaining it in largely economic terms: impoverishment and dependency at the hands of a cotton market suffering from chronic, and at times severe, depression during the postbellum years.'" The argument, of course, is neither badly taken nor wrongheaded. By all accounts, the material conditions of most white family- farmers deteriorated steadily. They increasingly failed to raise adequate foodstuffs for household consumption, became heavily indebted for the purchase of supplies, lost their land in growing numbers, and faced declining prospects of reattaining the status of freeholders. Economic tribulation does not necessarily spark political insurgency, however. It may just as easily sap resistance, and it dispenses no inherent ideology to its victims. If, according to the conventional wisdom, Southern yeomen were touchy and isolated individualists, petty entrepreneurs with their backs to the wall by the 189os, there is no clear reason why they would have been lured by the Populist vision of cooperative commonwealth. Small wonder that much of the historiography finds Populism so perplexing.  (location 111)

> This study, therefore, is informed by two interrelated propositions: first, that Populism, or any other political movement, can best be understood by analyzing how its participants directly experienced social change; and second, that this experience can become most meaningful by tracing it back into the antebellum period. (location 128)

> Ideally, a study of the origins of Southern Populism should be regional in scope, for the movement displayed important variations. In some states, the party won consistently substantial electoral support and adhered closely to the full spectrum of national demands. In others, support fluctuated and the leadership came to abandon much of the party platform for the free-silver panacea. (location 133)

> Predominantly white, the Upcountry provides an excellent example of a region that moved from the periphery into the mainstream of the cotton economy between 185o and 18go. Boasting roughly one-fourth of Georgia's white population, the area raised less than one-tenth of all the state's cotton before the Civil War; by the 188os it raised almost one-quarter, as total cotton production nearly quadrupled. Politically, the Upcountry also trod a path familiar to nonplantation districts, from its strong leanings toward hard-money Democracy during the 184os and 1850s to its enthusiastic response to the Southern Farmers' Alliance during the late 188os.  (location 141)

> This study will not include a thorough treatment of Populism itself. Nor will it trace the origins of discrete issues and programs upon which the People's party stood. Rather, the concern is with social change and popular consciousness; with the materials and dynamics of a political culture; with class and race; with the roots, the promise, and the limits of certain forms of radicalism. The concern, in short, is with those experiences leading to and, indeed, informing what has appropriately been called the Populist "moment." I hope to show that the experiences had less to do with deteriorating conditions or spreading poverty, per se, than with the transformation of social relations and particular sorts of confrontations-with the penetration of market relations into a society ofdifferent organization and sensibility, and with the conflicts provoked thereby. In social terms, those conflicts arrayed town against countryside, merchants and landlords against yeomen and tenants of both races; in cultural terms, the conflicts arrayed the values of the free market against the republicanism of petty producers. A legacy of the eighteenth century that the popular classes claimed for their own after the Civil War and Reconstruction '20 this republicanism gave Populism its ideological force and political vitality. Thus, if the story is confined to a small geographical locale, its implications reach far beyond. It links not only rural folk in Georgia with their counterparts throughout the South, but also the South with much of nineteenth-century America, and much of nineteenth-century America with much of the industrializing world. It is a story that needs to be told.  (location 149)

> "I am sometimes fearful that you will not be pleased with the Society in the up Country," lie wrote her in 1853. "You will think it strange ... to see white people living in Log Cabins . . . [and] you will find all sorts of Society here except Aristocracy."' (location 160)

> the couple chose to remain, and Burke began a law practice in the small town of Carrollton, though not before hiring out his slaves to coastal rice planters. But (location 164)

> From the seaboard into the piedmont, across the fertile soils of the Gulf states, through the Mississippi Valley, and into eastern Texas, the regime spread, drawing into its orbit many small farmers who could feasibly grow the new staple, and linking their destinies with those of the upper class.2  (location 169)

> The availability of cheap western lands, the utilization of slave labor, the low level of technological development, and the aristocratic vision of many planters encouraged methods of land cultivation and accumulation that served at once to exhaust the soil and to strain class relations by crowding out smallholders. (location 171)

> Around the time of the Revolution, the "Backcountry," where small farms and free labor predominated, boasted a substantial population and offered it cultural, as well as political, challenge to the gentry.' Here the "evangelical revolt"' first took root, then moved eastward into the slaveholders' domain, where the Baptists scorned the pretensions of the elite and created forms of community which called traditional notions of authority and hierarchy into quest ion.5 (location 179)

> The Backcountry of one generation could become part of the Cotton Belt in the next. (location 183)

> While their political loyalties varied from state to state and county to county, nonplantation districts generated the stiffest opposition to secession, the highest desertion rates in the Confederate army, the greatest number of white Republicans and Independents, and many of Populism's strongholds."  (location 187)

> Before the turn of the nineteenth century, the state distributed land under the headright system, allotting Zoo acres to every family head, with an additional 50 acres for each child and slave up to the number of ten, thus laying the foundation for the emergence of large estates. (location 195)

^~Note: sort of. but fundamentally egalitarian

> Newly created counties were henceforth divided into land districts and then subdivided into square tracts 01 '202-5 acres. Every tree white male over the age of twenty-one who could prove American citizenship and had paid taxes in Georgia for a year was entitled to one draw; those with wives and children were permitted two. The government then granted title upon receipt of 'a small fee.'"  (location 197)

> The vast majority of yeoman households included only the immediate family, though at some point an elderly parent might be present. (location 317)

> There is little doubt that slavery on smaller farms had an easier social atmosphere and promoted distinctive forms of racial interaction. Whites and blacks shared a close living environment, worked side by side at similar tasks, might attend the same church, and could engage in casual fraternization. Thus. David M. Highfield, who farmed $500 worth of land in Jackson County during the early 185os, traded, drank, and gambled with some of the local blacks.'" (location 321)

> And a man like David M. Highfield might have rubbed shoulders, socially and economically, with the slaves, but he was indicted for the "oflense. -3 (location 332)

> Whether or not they owned slaves, yeoman farmers normally raised more than enough grain and meat for their own sustenance.:' (location 333)

> ramifications. Most Upcountry yeomen participated in it market, but one decidedly local in character and regulated by custom. (location 341)

> Few small farmers could afford cotton gins or raise enough cotton to sustain direct links with factors in Southern ports. Hence, they turned to wealthy planters who would gin and market their crop for a reasonable fee, or sold the cotton to mercantile establishments nearby, often owned or backed by the planters themselves. (location 531)

> The experience of Hancock County's Benton Miller is illustrative. Marriage in 1858 to Matilda Womble, daughter of a wealthy slaveholder, brought Miller three slaves and an eighty-five acre farm, and enabled him to "plant cotton for myself ... [for] the first time," thereby "making a commencement in life." Miller worked in the fields with his slaves but could always depend on his father-in-law, who lived close by, to lend a hand when extra labor was needed. On one occasion, "Mr. Womble sent all of his hoe gang over ... to help me finish chopping [cotton] the first time and we got don." Another substantial slaveowner, a Mr. Harrison, gave Miller access to additional slave labor and paid for his subscription to the Southern Countryman. In return, Miller did odd jobs for his neighbors or kin, or lent them his own slaves. Thus, on November 27, 1858, "Harry and Clark went to Mr. Wombles to pay back Lige's time." Several days later, "Harry [was] at Mr. Harrison's [killing hogs]." Miller raised eleven hales of cotton that year and hoped to double his output the next. Womble and Harrison set the social standard for Miller and many of his counterparts.'  (location 535)

> neighbors took up a collection and bought him two more. If a family's home, furniture, or barn burned, "the neighbors came bearing gifts, food, dishes and clothes and quilts and even furniture. They contributed logs and lumber, helped to rebuild the house and barn, and brought wagon loads of fodder to Iced the stock." "Borrowing ... was ,neighboring,'" Hudgins proclaimed, adding that "it was it long trip to the store and often a family had no money and nothing to barter."" In some cases, as in the Black Belt, social custom and economic necessity brought Upcountry yeomen into quasi-dependent relations with planters. Thomas Maguire, (location 571)

> On the one hand, white class divisions in the South, broadly considered, fell primarily along geographical lines. Most small farmers and other nonslaveholders resided in nonplantation areas. Their claims to the means of production, their penchant for semisubsistence agriculture, and their commitment to local autonomy did not clash directly with the exigencies of the plantation order. Afro-American slaves produced the surpluses that underwrote great fortunes; the planters had no need to accumulate and discipline a white labor force. Indeed, the planters' own experience led them to share a distaste for the power of the marketplace as well as a profound localism with the mass of Southern whites. And it was precisely on slavery's role in mitigating the centralization of authority and the development of market relations-expressed in the ideology (location 919)

> democratic and deferential in substance-that complemented the relations of social and economic lilt. In an era of limited transportation and communication, the courthouse, not the state legislature, the Congress, or the presidency, stood as the symbol of political authority; local, rather than state or national, concerns elicited the greatest popular attention. And that attention was considerable. By the i 840s, a series of reforms stretching back into the eighteenth century had broadened the suffrage to include all adult white males and expanded the number of elective offices on every level of government. This process of democratization grew out of extended agitation, much of which originated in the Upcountry, but in many ways it bolstered instead of challenged the influence of the well-to-do." For although reflecting and contributing to the yeoman commitment to local autonomy and political independence, (location 988)

> relations particularly compelling. According to Georgia law, all county officials had to post bond as part of their oath, and the bonds were rather substantial. Sheriffs had to put up $20,000, tax receivers and collectors had to put up double the taxes due the state from their county, and even the clerk of the Inferior Court had to put up $3,000. Clearly, few smallholders had the resources to stand for these sums, so they turned to neighboring planters who would sign as security. This loosely organized, but nonetheless widespread, patron-client structure strengthened the slaveholders' political influence in the Black Belt and in the South as a whole.''' The stipulation that county officers post bond, along with the provision that grand jurors be "able, discrete, and qualified citizens" (location 1030)

>
