The Brothers: John Foster Dulles, Allen Dulles, and Their Secret World War
by Stephen Kinzer

_(Last annotated on August 16, 2014)_

> Foster, whose favorite hymn was “Work for the Night Is Coming,” felt the impact of this environment most deeply. According to his mother’s diary, by the age of two he was fascinated with prayers and “always says Amen very heartily”; at four he was a fully attentive Sunday School pupil; at five he displayed a “lovely devotional spirit”; and he celebrated turning seven by memorizing seven psalms. (location 130)

> He had lived a classic pioneer life in the age of manifest destiny, embodying the archetypal story of a brave man who sets off to tame wild lands and illuminate dark places. America was to him a nation blessed by Providence, powerful to the point of invincibility, whose people were destined to spread, civilize, and command. He transmitted this belief to his grandsons. From him they also learned how profitable it can be to ingratiate oneself with men of wealth and influence. (location 151)

> History remembers John Watson Foster’s brief term as secretary of state for a singular accomplishment. In 1893 he helped direct the overthrow of the Hawaiian monarchy. (location 158)

> After leaving office, “Grandfather Foster” considered returning to his Indiana law practice, but after hearing another Indiana lawyer recount a long legal battle over a hog, he decided to stay in Washington. He set out not to become a lawyer like others, but to invent a new profession: broker for corporations seeking favors in Washington and chances to expand abroad. It was an idea that fit the era. American farmers and manufacturers had so effectively mastered the techniques of mass production that they were producing far more than the United States could consume. They needed foreign markets to fend off ruin. Many also coveted resources from overseas. This required a muscular, assertive foreign policy that would force weaker countries to trade with Americans on terms (location 166)

> He arranged to “borrow” them for the winter months at his red brick mansion near Dupont Circle in Washington. There they lived amid exotic art objects from China and other faraway lands, studied under private tutors, and were attended by liveried servants directed by a majordomo one member of the clan remembered as “Madison, the graying colored butler.” Best of all, they had the chance to sit through dinners with a dazzling parade of America’s political and business mandarins. (location 182)

> During that first winter in Washington, Allie developed a fascination with the Boer War, and he poured out his passion in a six-thousand-word essay asserting that “the Boers want peace but England has to have the gold and so she goes around fighting all the little countries.” His grandfather was so impressed that he paid to have the essay privately printed, complete with spelling errors, and Allie became a published author at the age of eight. His older brother was unimpressed, sniffing that Allie’s anticolonial ideas were “wrong-headed and infantile.” (location 199)

> That view may have been correct, but in pronouncing it, Foster showed a judgmental harshness that never softened. From early childhood he was solemn, disciplined, and reserved, but also sharply self-righteous. He never lost his temper or complained, but disdained those who fell short of his standards. Memorizing long Bible passages—he could recite the book of John by heart—was one of his favorite pastimes. Already the two brothers were developing markedly different personalities. Foster was hardworking, narrowly focused, socially inept, and serious beyond his years. His sister Eleanor saw him “more like a second father than a brother.” Allie was outgoing and amiable, but prone to explosions of temper. “His intensity of rage, his emotion when he objected to something, was often overwhelming,” Eleanor wrote. The passage of time deepened these differences. Foster’s trademarks were a dark hat and umbrella, Allie’s a rakish mustache and pipe. Foster became rich and powerful, but remained nearly friendless and often seemed ill at ease. Allie developed into a witty raconteur whose genial manner could beguile almost anyone. He was, as one biographer put it, “the romantic and adventurous member of the family” but also “a much darker, more ruthless and unscrupulous man than his brother.” (location 203)

> This was a radically new concept. Past American leaders had taken the opposite view, that darker-skinned people were incapable of self-government and needed to be ruled by others—a view summarized by the first American military commander in Cuba, General William Shafter, when he pronounced Cubans “no more fit for self-government than gunpowder is for hell.” Wilson thought otherwise. “When properly directed,” he asserted, “there is no people not fitted to self-government.” (location 547)

> In the 1920s, working for banks including Brown Brothers, Lazard Frères, Goldman Sachs, and First National Bank of Boston, Foster arranged seventeen loans to Latin American countries totaling nearly $200 million—equivalent to more than $2 billion in the early twenty-first century—and also three loans to China from J. P. Morgan. His special focus was Europe, where his clients lent more than a billion dollars during the 1920s, most of it to Germany. He had helped draft the complex terms of German reparation payments, designing a system under which Germany would borrow from foreign banks to pay off its war debts. This created a highly lucrative market in an abstruse field that he understood as well as any American. With his guidance, American banks began investing in banks in Germany, and also lending to German utility companies, private firms like Hansa Steamship Lines, the cities of Berlin, Munich, Hanover, Frankfurt, Breslau, and Nuremberg, and the state of Prussia. (location 627)

> Foster and Douglas were profoundly different kinds of Americans. Beneath their encounter lay opposing beliefs about how law should be practiced, how the United States should act in the world, and, in the end, how life should be lived. Foster was a tight-lipped patrician who had become rich by serving America’s most powerful corporations and banking houses. Douglas was a passionate iconoclast who sympathized with underdogs and admired foreign cultures. One embraced religious and political certitudes, abhorred upheaval, and viewed the world from paneled suites in New York, Washington, and European capitals. The other rejected dogma, learned about the world by taking rugged trips through remote lands, and believed the United States should approach other countries “with humility” and let them solve their problems “in their own way.” “I’m not sure I want to go to heaven,” Douglas mused later in life. “I’m afraid I might meet John Foster Dulles there.” (location 645)

> the estate of their Long Island neighbor Archie Roosevelt. There they read romantic poetry and played with a select group of other children—among them Roosevelt’s nephew Kermit, who would later go to work for Allen and enter history as the CIA officer who directed the overthrow of Iran’s government. Joan married a prominent Austrian, then divorced him and married another Austrian, a diplomat. She returned to the United States and lived an apparently fulfilling life. (location 788)

> disarmament. He rambled through subjects ranging from the American Civil War to the perfidy of Poland. When Davis asked him about reports of “excesses” against dissidents, Hitler, well briefed on his guests’ role in global finance, replied that he was simply imposing order “to protect the millions in foreign capital that are invested in Germany.” Gangs of Nazi thugs were beating Jews on German streets while Allen was there, but he came home without animus toward Hitler. When he returned to Berlin two years later, though, he found conditions worse and had what he called a “sinister impression.” He was disturbed by stories he heard from Jewish clients, and worried about the implications of Sullivan & Cromwell’s work fueling German financial and industrial power. Nazism became the first and only important subject on which the Dulles brothers seriously disagreed. Allen sensed what was coming and wished to spare Sullivan & Cromwell the stigma of collaboration. Foster could not bear to turn away. (location 822)

> At the Paris peace conference he argued unsuccessfully that Germany should not be forced to make crushing reparation payments to the victorious allies, and later he came to believe, probably correctly, that by insisting on those payments, the world helped push Germany toward aggression. In the period between the world wars, when Foster’s legal practice became truly global, he devoted himself most assiduously to Germany. He had already developed an emotional attachment, based on his admiration for Germany’s centuries of achievement and the rigor of its social order, and a political one, stemming from his belief that it was a rising nation and a bulwark against Bolshevism. Years of work for German clients gave his attachment an economic basis as well. (location 833)

> From his course with Henri Bergson after graduating from Princeton, Foster had picked up the concept of “dynamic” forces in eternal conflict with “static” ones. Bergson used this dichotomy as a way to understand religion and morality, but Foster applied it to global politics, which he (location 838)

> interpreted as “the cyclical struggle between the dynamic and the static forces of the world.” This was a way of placing nations into neat groups, which appealed to his ordered mind. During the 1930s he began describing France and Britain as “static” societies, interested only in defending what they had, and predicting that the future would be shaped by three newly creative and “dynamic” powers: Germany, Italy, and Japan. “These dynamic peoples,” he wrote in one article, “are determined to mold their states into a form which would permit them to take their destiny into their own hands and to attain that enlarged status which, under a liberal and peaceful form of government, had been denied them.” (location 840)

> would produce the Zyklon B gas used at Nazi death camps—and as Foster was bringing it into the nickel cartel, he also helped it establish a global chemical cartel. He was a board member and legal counsel for another chemical producer, the Solvay conglomerate, based in Belgium. During the 1930s he guided Solvay, I.G. Farben, the American firm Allied Chemical & Dye, and several other companies into a chemical cartel just as potent as the one he had organized for nickel producers. (location 862)

> In mid-1931 a consortium of American banks, eager to safeguard their investments in Germany, persuaded the German government to accept a loan of nearly $500 million to prevent default. Foster was their agent. His ties to the German government tightened after Hitler took power at the beginning of 1933 and appointed Foster’s old friend Hjalmar Schacht as minister of economics. (location 865)

^~Note: a ton of stuff on Nazis and dulles

> Both believed that a resurgent Germany would stand against Bolshevism. Mobilizing American capital to finance its rise was their common interest. Working with Schacht, Foster helped the National Socialist state find rich sources of financing in the United States for its public agencies, banks, and industries. The two men shaped complex restructurings of German loan obligations at several “debt conferences” in Berlin—conferences that were officially among bankers, but were in fact closely guided by the German and American governments—and came up with new formulas that made it easier for the Germans to borrow money from American banks. (location 872)

> Since 1933, all letters written from the German offices of Sullivan & Cromwell had ended, as required by German regulations, with the salutation Heil Hitler! That did not disturb Foster. He churned out magazine and newspaper articles asserting that the “dynamic” countries of the world—Germany, Italy, and Japan—“feel within themselves potentialities which are suppressed,” and that Hitler’s semi-secret rearmament project simply showed that “Germany, by unilateral action, has now taken back her freedom of action.” Allen felt quite differently. After returning from Berlin in 1935, he told his brother that the time had come for the firm to close its Berlin office and the subsidiary in Frankfurt. (location 900)

> Much of his political energy during the 1930s, the lawyer-diplomat John J. McCloy later recalled, was aimed at “rationalizing this Hitler movement.” (location 914)

> By some accounts, Foster wept after pronouncing those words. Later he backdated the announcement by a year, to make it appear that the firm had closed its German offices in 1934 rather than 1935. He and Janet, however, continued to visit Germany as the Nazi regime tightened its grip on power, (location 923)

> making trips in 1936, 1937, and 1939. Apparently nothing he saw disturbed him. He supported the neutralist America First committee—Sullivan & Cromwell drew up its articles of incorporation without charge—and roused its members with speeches denouncing Churchill, Roosevelt, and other “warmongers.” Hitler impressed him as “one who from humble beginnings, and despite the handicap of alien nationality, had attained the unquestioned leadership of a great nation.” (location 925)

> The Dulles brothers were paragons of the Wilsonian idea that came to be known as “liberal internationalism.” They believed that trouble in the world came from misunderstandings among ruling elites, not from social or political injustices, and that commerce could reduce or eliminate this trouble. This was a refined version of the “open door” policy the United States had embraced for decades—a policy that might better be called “kick in the door” because it was aimed at forcing other countries to accept trade arrangements favorable to American interests. (location 962)

> Above all they were moved by the conviction that as the United States grew to global power, its political leaders urgently needed guidance from bankers, businessmen, and international lawyers. To provide this guidance in a systematic way, they brought their new club into being in 1921. They called it the Council on Foreign Relations. Its motto was a single Latin word that spoke volumes: ubique, meaning “everywhere.” This was an era when American foreign policy (location 975)

> Pearson repeatedly accused him of conflict of interest for taking on diplomatic assignments while earning his living as an “operator for the bankers.” Later, Allen admitted that there might have been some truth to the charge. “Possibly I shouldn’t have done it,” he wrote to a friend. “You remember what happened to Lot’s wife.” (location 1042)

> as “the room.” It (location 1046)

> Jung had reflected deeply about the cultural roots of Nazism, and Mary often mentioned his views in reports she prepared for Allen. The two men, spymaster and spiritual seeker, met at the beginning of 1943 and struck up what Allen called a “still-experimental marriage between espionage and psychology.” Jung wrote a series of reports, including psychological profiles of Hitler and other Nazi leaders, that Allen said were of “real help to me in gauging the political situation.” Some reached the Allied commander, General Dwight Eisenhower, who sent Jung a letter of commendation after the war ended. (location 1249)

> Mary also introduced Clover to Carl Gustav Jung, whose help she sought in dealing with her troubled marriage; by Mary’s account it was shaped by enraged arguments “which Allen invariably won by the simple device of clamping an iron curtain between them.” Contact with Jung left a deep impression on both women. After the war Mary helped edit a Jungian journal in California. Clover promoted Jung’s work in New York, and her younger daughter, Joan, became a Jungian analyst. (location 1298)

> involvement in religious groups. Foster’s re-encounter with the earnest Presbyterianism of his youth began when he traveled to Oxford in the summer of 1937 to participate in a gathering of Christian leaders called the World Conference on Church, Community, and State. Religious thinkers including Reinhold Niebuhr, Paul Tillich, and T. S. Eliot joined in far-ranging discussions about how Christians could help shape a more peaceful world. After returning home, Foster persuaded the Federal Council of Churches to create a platform from which he could speak out on political and moral issues. It emerged as the Commission to Study the Bases of a Just and Durable Peace, and from 1940 to 1946 it was Foster’s platform, his megaphone, and the center of his intensifying public activism. During this period of his life, Foster moved closer than ever to the ideals of global cooperation. He never became a full-fledged “one-worlder,” but he hammered relentlessly on the theme that self-defeating nationalism had caused devastating global conflicts that could be resolved only by new global organizations. Much of what he said and wrote seems startling in light of his post-war metamorphosis. (location 1332)

> Foster’s book, which also urged arms control, decolonization, and a new world organization, was widely discussed in the press, endorsed by the Rockefeller Foundation, and printed in a special edition for Protestant clergymen. Yet when he secured a meeting at the White House to present a copy to Franklin Roosevelt, he found the president preoccupied with winning the war and uninterested in discussing Christian imperatives. He hoped for a warmer reception in London, and through the American ambassador arranged a meeting with Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden and his undersecretary, Sir Alexander Cadogan. They too were unimpressed. “Lunched with A. in his flat,” Cadogan wrote in his diary. “J. F. Dulles there … J. F. D. the wooliest type of useless pontificating American.… Heaven help us!” (location 1353)

> “To look at him you might think he had just finished contact with a green persimmon,” began a magazine profile of Foster that appeared during the 1944 campaign. “To listen to him on the subject of his business (he is top senior partner in the Wall Street firm of Sullivan & Cromwell), you would only begin to guess that he can distill the poetry of action as well as a big income out of such things as reshuffling the corporate structure of the International Nickel Company.” (location 1364)

> One of the most productive relationships Foster developed in the 1940s was with the ambitious journalistic entrepreneur Henry Luce, (location 1390)

> “We are the inheritors of all the great principles of Western Civilization,” Luce wrote. “It now becomes our time to be the powerhouse.” Foster had much in common with Luce. Both were internationalist, pro-business Republicans shaped by Calvinist principles and the missionary tradition; Luce’s parents were missionaries, and he was born in China. Both believed Providence had ordained for the United States a unique role in the world. Both abhorred all forms of socialism, and saw in Moscow a godless tyranny dedicated to destroying the West. Fighting Communism was the challenge they believed history had assigned to their generation. “The two Presbyterians, Luce and Dulles, would cause suspense and even terror in ensuing years because of their determination to reshape the world as closely as possible after the pattern of American transcendence,” one of Luce’s biographers has written. “Both had the good fortune of discovering that their religion and their politics were complementary.… Both Presbyterians were men of great mental vigor who sunk to narrowest parochialism in the area where the molten materials of their religion, patriotism, and politics fused into one cold and flinty mass. Such ferociously aggressive men were uncomfortable with ideological competition.… When either Luce or Dulles started talking about ‘America’s priceless spiritual heritage’ or ‘the hopes of all who love freedom,’ lesser nations had reason to become uneasy.” Luce did as much as anyone to transmit the Cold War consensus to Americans. Somewhat unexpectedly, he found a partner in Foster, who was undergoing a remarkable transformation. In the space of less than a year, between late 1945 and the middle of 1946, Foster moved from preaching tolerance and forgiveness to promoting the “devil theory” he had formerly scorned. In a series of articles for Life, he painted a steadily more frightening picture of the Soviet threat. His first major volley was a two-part series, published in June 1946, entitled “Thoughts on Soviet Conduct and What to Do About It.” In it he set the urgent tone that defined how he, the Luce press, the Republican and Democratic parties, and most Americans would view the world for a generation. (location 1397)

> One British diplomat warned plaintively that if this (location 2246)

> momentum was not stopped, “we will be driven back to our island, where we shall starve.” (location 2246)

> “Some paradox of our nature,” the essayist Lionel Trilling has observed, “leads us, when once we have made our fellow men the objects of our enlightened (location 2562)

> interest, to go on to make them the objects of our pity, then of our wisdom, ultimately of our coercion.” The concept (location 2563)

> Kermit Roosevelt wrote at the end of his account of Operation Ajax. “[My report] was, I thought, very well received. One of my audience seemed almost alarmingly enthusiastic. John Foster Dulles was leaning back in his chair. Despite his posture, he was anything but sleepy. His eyes were gleaming; he seemed to be purring like a giant cat. Clearly, he was not only enjoying what he was hearing, but my instinct told me that he was planning as well.… Within weeks I was offered command of a Guatemala operation already in the making.” (location 2616)

> Arbenz, unaware of these proceedings, continued to speak defiantly. Early in 1954 he declared that “it is entirely up to Guatemala to decide what kind of democracy she should have,” and demanded that outside powers treat Latin American countries as more than “objects of monopolistic investments and sources of raw materials.” Time called this “the most forthright pro-Communist declaration the President has ever uttered.” (location 2755)

> Figueres was elected to the presidency in 1953 after defeating a Communist-supported uprising, which should have made him a hero in Washington, especially since he had been educated in the United States, married an American woman, and deeply absorbed New Deal principles. Once in office, however, he promoted land reform and abolished the Costa Rican army. Worst of all, he ceaselessly denounced Central American and Caribbean dictators who were allies of the United States, encouraged plots against them, and sheltered many plotters, including Communists. Costa Rican landowners who dreamed of overthrowing Figueres approached Allen. He was sympathetic. In mid-1954 Senator (location 2761)

> ‘invaders’ and ‘Yankee imperialists’ [are] anxious to wipe out agrarian reform appears to be most dangerous not only for Guat consumption, but for effect wherever in world agrarian reform questions vitally important, including Latin America, Asia, Africa, even certain European countries,” the Opa Locka command post reported to Allen. “Recommend therefore you suggest State Dept. immediate countermeasures.” Allen brought this message to Foster, and they agreed that the best “countermeasure” would be a disingenuous speech by Foster. He delivered it over national radio and television on June 30, the day after the last pro-Arbenz forces in Guatemala capitulated. (location 3048)

> they made clear that the CIA had been behind the overthrows of Arbenz and Mossadegh. The reporters, presumably reflecting Allen’s views, wrote that Arbenz had been deposed because he was a “communist puppet” engaged in “unbridled subversion of the Guatemalan people,” and that had he remained in office, “we might have faced the necessity of sending Marines to reinforce the Panama Canal and save Latin America.” “Another CIA triumph was the successful overthrow, in 1953, of old, dictatorial Premier Mohammad Mossadegh and the return to power of this country’s friend, Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi,” they wrote. “A helping hand in the rescue of one country such as Guatemala or Iran from communism is worth the CIA’s annual budget many times over. Whether the squeamish like it or not, the United States must know what goes on in those dark places of the world where our overthrow is being plotted by communists.” As Allen basked in this publicity, Time chose Foster as “Man of the Year” and put him on the cover of its first issue of 1955. He was a good choice. Few were fighting Communism more vigorously, and nothing less than the survival of humanity seemed to hinge on the outcome of that fight. The Time profile was flattering and self-congratulatory, as much about America’s destined role in the world as about an individual. It called Foster “a practical (location 3081)

> sense that the masses of the people support him and not the French or their puppets.” Stilling or silencing voices such as these, and hearing instead only those who said, “Ho is a Communist, therefore he cannot really represent the aspirations of his people, and moreover they regard him as a tool of Russia or China,” led American leaders—and people as well—into an anti-Communist climate of deafness and blindness.… It is one of the most dangerous, in fact potentially suicidal, things a great nation can do in world affairs: to cut off its eyes and ears, to castrate its analytic capacity, to shut itself off from the truth because of blind prejudice and a misguided dispensation of good and evil. (location 3171)

> Walter Lippmann asked him about it in an interview. “Look, Walter,” Dulles told him, “I’ve got to get some real fighting men into the south of Asia. The only Asians who can really fight are the Pakistanis. That’s why we need them in the alliance. We could never get along without the Gurkhas.” “But Foster,” Lippmann replied, “the Gurkhas aren’t Pakistanis.” “Well, they may not be Pakistanis, but they’re Moslems.” “No, I’m afraid they’re not Moslems, either. They’re Hindus.” “No matter!” Foster replied, and launched into a half-hour lecture about the dangers of Communism in Asia. (location 3524)

> open to negotiating their release, and even invited the men’s relatives to visit them. Foster forbade these visits and denounced the Chinese for their “reprehensible” imprisonment of two Americans on “trumped up charges.” He might have used this case as a way to begin a dialogue with China. As he had shown by snubbing Zhou at Geneva a few months earlier, however, he was disposed in the opposite direction. In 1957 Zhou made another overture, offering to free the two airmen if Foster would allow a delegation of American journalists to visit China, but Foster scorned this as “blackmail.” There the case lay for more than a decade, until Chinese-American hostility finally began to fade. In the warmer climate that surrounded President Nixon’s visits to Beijing in the early 1970s, the United States finally made the admission for which China had been waiting: the two men were intelligence officers. Fecteau was released in 1971. Downey came home two years later. “One must look to Secretary of State John Foster Dulles to understand fully the complex and disappointing course of the prisoner affair,” one study concluded years later. (location 3545)

> Churchill agreed. After one of their meetings he remarked, “Foster Dulles is the only case I know of a bull who carries his own china shop around with him.” (location 3569)

> They began two weeks later, and photo analysts soon began producing reports on what they saw. Among their first findings was that the Soviets could not possibly be producing as many warplanes as the CIA had estimated. James Killian brought this finding to Eisenhower. He appreciated it but refused to agree with Killian that the overstated estimate reflected the “administrative inadequacies of Allen Dulles.” Eisenhower had appointed two thoughtful (location 3801)

> The report, delivered several months later, warned about “the increased mingling in the internal affairs of other nations of bright, highly graded young men who must be doing something all the time to justify their reason for being.” (location 3806)

> “Don’t tie yourself irrevocably to a policy of preserving the unity of Indonesia,” Foster told Hugh Cumming, the Virginia-bred diplomat he chose as ambassador to Indonesia. “The territorial integrity of China became a shibboleth. We finally got a territorially integrated China—for whose benefit? The Communists.… As between a territorially united Indonesia which is leaning and progressing toward Communism and a breakup of that country into racial and geographical units, I would prefer the latter.” (location 4041)

> This fictional scene is a fulcrum of Graham Greene’s moody masterpiece The Quiet American, which became a best seller in 1957 and took many (location 4122)

> “I know your motives are good, they always are,” the older man tells him. Later he muses: “His innocence had angered me … but wasn’t he right too to be young and mistaken?” (location 4127)

> Time put Sukarno on its cover, looking defiant against a dark, turbulent background. Inside was a two-page map with icons locating Indonesia’s resources, including not just oil, coal, rubber, gold, nickel, and bauxite but also orangutans, komodo dragons, and head hunters. The accompanying article portrayed the rebellion just as Foster and Allen wished it to be portrayed: as a patriotic uprising against Communism, with no hint of outside involvement. Last week Indonesia, racked by civil war, was in dire danger of splintering apart.… All the rebels asked was that Indonesia’s President 1) behave himself constitutionally, 2) abandon his partnership with the Communist party … Indonesia’s rebellion is less a (location 4222)

> “I am called a communist by the American press, and even Secretary Dulles says Indonesia is drifting toward communism,” he said. “I am not a communist. Every word I said in America I still stand by.” This plea had no effect in Washington. Allen grew concerned, however, when he learned that reporters from Knight Newspapers and U.S. News and World Report had filed stories about covert American intervention in Indonesia. He reacted by telephoning James Knight, the executive vice president of Knight Newspapers, and David Lawrence, the president and editor of U.S. News and World Report, and both agreed to have the offending stories killed or heavily edited. The Chicago Daily News hinted at what was happening—it said that weapons for Indonesian rebels were falling from the sky “like manna from heaven”—but no other newspaper went even that far. Many were spared the necessity of deciding what to print because their correspondents censored themselves. “We did not write about it,” an Associated Press reporter confessed years later. “Maybe it was a kind of patriotism that kept us from doing so.” (location 4252)

> “Do you mean the patriotic people of Iraq who were sick and tired of having those in control of Iraq bribed by the United States government?” Langer asked. (location 4337)

> Pope kept his part of the bargain for a while. Years later, however, when the Indonesia operation became public, he became indignant at hearing Richard Bissell describe it as “a complete failure.” “We killed thousands of Communists,” Pope said, “even though half of them probably didn’t know what Communism meant.” (location 4372)

> “If there is an out-and-out question as to who began the name-calling between Sukarno and Washington, then I have to admit it was Sukarno,” he wrote in his memoir. “But look here, Sukarno is a shouter. He is emotional. If he is angry, he shoots thunderbolts. But he thunders only at those he loves. I would adore to make up with the United States of America.… Oh, America, what is the matter with you? Why couldn’t you have been my friend?” (location 4393)

> At the beginning of that year, almost no one outside of the Congo had heard of Lumumba. By midsummer, many powerful Americans had come to consider him a frightening new enemy. On August 18 President Eisenhower made private comments—they were not recorded—that Allen Dulles and others present interpreted as an order to kill Lumumba. A week later the Special Group, a subcommittee of the National Security Council that considered covert operations, met to discuss Lumumba, and Eisenhower’s national security adviser, Gordon Gray, reported that the president had “extremely strong feelings on the necessity for very straightforward action.” (location 4421)

> Eisenhower had created the Special Group in 1955 with a decree that Allen later called “one of the most secret documents in the US government.” It had just five members: the president, his national security adviser, the undersecretaries of state and defense, and the director of central intelligence. Its stated purpose was to authorize covert operations, but it also served as Eisenhower’s link to covert action. “Politically and diplomatically it would have been unseemly, and inciting, for the President to order coups, assassinations, and other mischief,” one historian has written. “The Special Group acted as his proxy. But in the end, its actions—its decisions, its approvals—were taken on behalf of the President, with his knowledge and approval.” (location 4426)

>
