# The Saffron Wave: Democracy and Hindu Nationalism in Modern India
by Thomas Blom Hansen

_(Last annotated on July 1, 2014)_

> Hindu nationalism could not consolidate any major constituency among the millions of marginalized poor and illiterate Indians. Instead, the xenophobic discourses of Hindu nationalism developed in the heart of the large and expanding middle class, which political common sense today holds to be the very prerequisite for creation of stable democracies in the postcolonial world. It was in these mainly urban environments, rich in education, associational life, and what Putnam would characterize as "civic engagement" and "social capital" (Putnam 1993, 163-70), that the Hindu nationalist movement has found its most receptive audiences. To understand and interpret contemporary Hindu nationalism in India we need, in other words, to map how the specific trajectory of Indian democracy and the historically changing governmentalities of the modern Indian state have shaped political imaginaries and public practices of the Indian middle class.  (location 91)

> Within the social worlds of the urban middle classes in India, this apparent erosion of the civility of public culture is routinely attributed to the rise of "unworthy" (read: plebeian) leaders, to contamination of cultural values, to the free reign of material desires in modern urban life, and so on. However, the more brutal languages of politics also flourish at the heart of the middle-class world, for instance when broader anxieties regarding the encroachment of the poor and the plebeians upon so-called "respectable" society are translated into discourses on the "right of the majority," antiminority xenophobia, and fantasies of an authoritarian state and strong leadership. Since the early 1990s, the telephone surveys frequently carried out by various English-language weeklies in India regarding political preferences and attitudes to political issues have shown that the predominantly middle-class respondents (that is, those who own a telephone) have grown increasingly skeptical toward the viability of democracy and more inclined toward stronger and more authoritarian forms of governance.  (location 222)

> Social Antagonisms and Politics One of the sometimes overlooked consequences of the birth and dispersion of this new and abstract discourse on equality, freedom, and sovereignty is that it made a more radical and generalized form of social conflict possible. As Laclau and Mouffe have noted, even the most exploitative form of inequality does not necessarily carry the seed of resistance and conflict within its own logic. There might be what I would call "distributional fights" regarding the relative positions, duties, and obligations within a system of subordination, but something more is needed to construct inequality as the result of malign oppression.' Historically this "something more" was exactly what Laclau and Mouffe have termed "the democratic imaginary": "the discursive conditions which made it possible to propose the different forms of inequality as illegitimate and anti-natural, and thus make them equivalent as forms of oppression. Here lay the profound subversive power of the democratic discourse, which would allow the spread of equality and liberty into increasingly wider domains and therefore act as a fermenting agent upon the different forms of struggle (location 296)

> Competing Nationalist Discourses The 1920s were crucial in the history of Indian nationalism in two respects. First, they marked the point at which "the masses" entered the modern Indian history of political representation. (location 606)

> Political activists from urban middle-class backgrounds now became increasingly acquainted with the social worlds of the poor, and public arenas for political assertion moved away from closed sessions and deliberations and into mass rallies in public spaces. Along with this "massification" of the political scene the period saw a steep rise in violent clashes between Hindus and Muslims. (location 612)

> way social inequality and social and cultural divisions in Indian society were problematized. The anticolonial critique of the injustices of poverty and exploitation ascribed to foreign domination and cruel traditions now gave way to a more practical and more openly paternalist discourse on the "ignorance and superstition" of the masses as obstacles to national development. In the draft for the first Five-Year Plan it was stated, "[Certain] conditions have to be fulfilled before the full flow of the people's energy for the task of the national reconstruction can be assured. The ignorance and apathy of large numbers have to be overcome" (Government of India 1951, 235).  (location 654)

> The Congress government was, however, also committed to social reforms and redistribution, but this commitment was severely restricted by the lack of will to intervene in the social processes unfolding beyond the horizons of the culturally dominant middle-class society-among the masses-and the difficulties involved in doing so by democratic means. Myrdal demonstrated this "middle-class bias" in the so-called Mahalanobis Committee Report investigating the causes behind the obvious ineffectiveness of redistributive policies in the early 1960s. The committee abstained from any systematic inquiry into the question of land distribution affecting the vast majority, and focused almost entirely on the so-called modern sectors, technicalities of taxation, and so on (Myrdal 1968, 758-61). In spite of the enlarged field of intervention of the developmental state that undoubtedly made the rhetoric of equality and social reform a central "legitimate problematic," persisting inequalities in the countryside rarely became a burning political issue. Universal franchise could not in itself translate the numerical weight of the masses into social reform because, as Kaviraj succinctly puts it, the Nehru regime "created a new arena of public life, which, like our public parks, was used only by the cultivated, leisurely unthreatened elites." What developed was, rather, a "strange inversion in the functioning of India's expanding state apparatus, inscribing it with the mark of indelible bad faith" (Kaviraj 1997a, 235). Accompanied by a high rhetoric of socialism and equality, the Indian state became the main provider of resources, jobs, recognition, and protection for the middle classes of bureaucrats, private entrepreneurs, and wealthy farmers-groups that soon developed a solid interest in the continuation of this style of governance.  (location 682)

> These gestures gave birth to a very influential construction of the "ideal national citizen" of modern India: the experienced, educated middle-class citizen, well versed in the wicked ways of the world, who devotes a period of his life, or part of his energy, to immersing himself among the masses, to do "selfless work among the downtrodden," as the well-known rhetoric goes, primarily through exemplary conduct and high ethical standards.31 Such ostensibly "unpolitical" activism was constructed as ennobling and purifying for the individual, whose selflessness was consolidated and moral standards further elevated by this forgetting of oneself and by sustained contact with the true people. This model became a crucial part of the social imaginary in contemporary India, thriving among voluntary organizations and social movements, and abounds today in the nongovernmental organizations.  (location 721)

> Sangh parivar, (location 1891)

> It had become widely accepted that political influence and visibility through various affiliates could yield rich dividends. However, the Janata experiment had also confirmed the deep-running skepticism, especially among older RSS men, regarding the "corrupting" impact of electoral politics on the Sangh parivar. A substantial portion of RSS activists also had apprehensions about the "populism" of the late Jana Sangh and the Janata party, which they saw as an accommodation of political coalition partners and a depletion of fundamental Hindu nationalist principles. The admission of a few Muslims and other "minority leaders" into the newly formed BJP in order to consolidate its secular credentials, as well as the adoption of "Gandhian socialism" as an official policy of the new BJP, further alienated substantial sections of the more conservative and militant sections of the Sangh parivar.  (location 1892)

> Effectively banished from institutional politics at the national level as well as from general elections organized around a few overriding emotional issues, these proliferating demands were instead staged by social movements, in concerted campaigns and agitations, and in many cases also through the growing range of regional parties.  (location 1936)

> Compared to earlier peasant organizations that were often closely related to political parties, this "new agrarianism" represented, Dhana- gare argues, a form of "apolitical populism" seeking direct influence on the formation and implementation of government policies (Dhanagare 1988.  (location 2000)

> The importance of status parameters over economic parameters in fact extended the OBC denomination to the significant number of dominant castes such as Jats, Yadavs, Lingayats, and Rajputs who rapidly emerged as the leading forces in this numerically strong vertical alliance of backward castes encompassing wealthy peasants and businessmen as well as marginalized landless laborers.  (location 2035)

> The community approach reflected the widespread paternalist assumption entertained in the urban middle class world that "backwards" and rural people simply live in their caste world, and that individual assessments of educational and cultural needs was therefore superfluous and not applicable. Besides, the community approach further entrenched and codified the long-standing knowledge-practice in the political field of representation, imagination, and self-objectivation of lower-caste groups.  (location 2039)

> The commission thus codified the historical mode of production of the Indian people, and codified the prevailing political practices of democracy and accommodation between cultural groups-be they caste, linguistic, religious, or ethnic-objectified by the state and continuously reproduced by self-proclaimed representatives. The endeavor toward objectivation of essential caste cultures, the trust in a symbolic enfranchisement and populist governmentality, and the belief in a "natural" solidarity among lower-caste groups were expressed in strikingly naive terms in the recommendations of the commission. (location 2041)

> This effect of social transformation and democratic revolution-belated in north India compared to the rest of the country-in turn challenged the sense of security, status, and competence in the middle classes, already shattered by the gradual retreat of the Indian state from the economic and regulative model of which it had been the main beneficiary. The anti-Mandal agitations and self-immolations of upper-caste students in north India in 1990 must be understood against this background of an established middle class, haunted by fears of what was seen as a "plebeian" threat to its hitherto complacent way of life and social position.  (location 2056)

>
